- [Narrator] In the year 1492,
Christopher Columbus discovered the Americas.
Millions died in pursuit of conquering this unknown land.
The European powers of the time took part in colonization
and the centuries after witnessed remarkable wars
and a new age of influence.
These events led to the birth
of a new nation on July 4th, 1776,
the United States of America.
Since, the USA has conquered the world
in every aspect possible.
From developing the most powerful military
in modern history,
two countless astonishing human accomplishments,
the country has earned the name the modern Roman Empire.
But can this giant continue its dominance?
To understand the story of this fascinating land,
we must start from the very beginning.
(tense music)
(upbeat music)
Long before European colonization,
the Native peoples of North America had developed complex
and sophisticated systems of society and government.
Hundreds of thousands warred, made peace,
and governed over specific regions
and had done so for thousands of years.
By the time the first European explorers began
to arrive on the North American continent
in the 15th century,
the Native Americans had already established themselves
and their communities for thousands of years.
The North American continent-
vast and rich with natural resources-
would beckon all who came to know of its shores.
And so when a Norse navigator named Leif Erikson learned
that there was a land west
of Greenland from fellow explorer, Bjarni Herjolfsson,
he made preparations to set sail.
Herjolfsson, who had been blown off-course
while sailing had accidentally discovered
what would one day be called Newfoundland.
And although he did not land,
his story gave Erikson the information he needed
to successfully sail across the Labrador Sea
and make landfall in North America.
Erikson and the Norseman would establish a small settlement
in Labrador called L'Anse aux Meadow or Meadows Cove.
This settlement and numerous small outposts built nearby it
would be abandoned over the course of about 20 years.
Afterward, it would be nearly another 500 years
before Europeans set foot on the shores of North America.
(tense music)
(ominous music) (tense music)
Searching for a more direct and faster route to India,
the great European powers of the age sent dozens
of expeditions around the globe.
In October, 1492, the Genovese explorer,
Christopher Columbus, employed by the king
and queen of Spain, discovered the West Indies,
and inadvertently opened a new frontier of exploration/
Popularized as the New World
by Florentine Explorer Amerigo Vespucci,
it was open season for European explorers, traders,
and businessmen alike.
European powers began claiming sections of this New World
as their own with every major exploratory mission.
Vespucci, who created and sold maps
of his own discoveries in the New World,
gained the notable distinction
of having the entire hemisphere named for him, America.
While much of the early exploration
of the New World focused on what would become known
as the Caribbean and South America,
it did not take long
before explorers turned their attention north
to the enormous landmass above Columbus's Hispaniola.
At the dawn of the 16th century, the Spanish, English,
Portuguese, Swedish, Dutch,
and French all entered a race to explore
and map the entire east coast of North America.
In 1497, Italian explorer, Giovanni Caboto,
known as John Cabot by his English employers,
discovered the same region of Newfoundland
that Leif Erikson and the Vikings
had settled nearly 500 years earlier.
Cabot's discoveries credited him as the discoverer
of the North American continent,
as no record of Erikson's expedition
or settlement had yet been discovered.
To the South, expeditions by Juan Ponce de Leon,
Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca,
and Hernando de Soto would map Florida
and the American Southeast,
as Spain prepared to establish permanent colonies
in the New World.
Likewise, to the North, Jacques Cartier explored
the Saint Lawrence River
while Giovanni da Verrazzano mapped much
of the East Coast for France.
All along the coast, the Europeans encountered
the numerous tribes of Native Americans.
Early interactions ranged from welcoming to violent,
as cultures from separate hemispheres met
for the first time.
As it had in the Caribbean and South America,
first contact introduced these cultures to each other
with the sharing of gifts and trading of information.
Naturally, these meetings exposed Native Americans
to European diseases
and caused widespread illness and death.
The first attempts to make permanent settlements
in the New World began in the mid 16th century
with varying degrees of success.
Surviving in the New World was not an easy task
and establishing a permanent settlement proved
to be exceptionally challenging.
In 1585, the English attempted
to establish a permanent colony
on Roanoke Island off the coast
of what is today North Carolina.
The journey across the Atlantic was brutal
and left the colonists with few supplies when they arrived,
making contact with
the local Aquascogoc, Pamala, and Sakonnet tribes,
the colonists, many of whom were military personnel,
became embroiled in an argument with the Aquascogoc
and burned their village to the ground.
Meetings with the Sakonnet went considerably better,
outfitting the colonists with enough food
to survive a miserable winter.
Smallpox and influenza epidemics ran
through every native village who encountered the colonists.
Communication broke down
and violence finally convinced the colonists to move on,
abandoning the colony.
Arriving in 1587,
a year after the first attempt to settle Roanoke failed,
colonists, largely made up of middle-class Londoners
with no military experience,
landed on Croatoan Island
and began to establish a settlement some 40 miles south
of the first failed settlement.
The colony suffered great difficulty surviving.
In 1588, a relief mission to the colony was looted
by Spanish Naval vessels operating off the coast,
leaving its new location unknown to English authorities.
That same year, Spanish vessels sailed near Croatoan Island
and found that it appeared abandoned.
The next relief mission to the colony finally arrived
in 1590 and found smoke rising from both Croatoan Island
and Roanoke Island.
A landing party discovered
both settlements abandoned and sacked.
The only clues were the letters CRO carved into a tree
and the word Croatoan carved into one of the posts
of a palisade allegedly built by the settlers of the colony.
Known one as the Lost Colony,
the settlers of Roanoke were never discovered.
The colony deemed lost by the English government.
In 1564, a group of French Huguenots settlers attempted
to start a colony
in what would become St. Augustine, Florida,
only to have the colony sacked,
and all of its male citizens killed by rival Spanish forces.
The settlement established by the Spanish colonists
at St. Augustine
is considered the first permanent European settlement
in North America.
(uplifting music)
In 1607, the English attempted again
to establish a permanent colony in the New World.
Led by the London company,
the settlement aimed to establish a colony in Virginia
and selected a marshy region on the James River,
which they christened Jamestown.
The colony did well initially,
quickly constructing living
and meeting space as well as a palisade fort.
Relations with the local Powhatan tribes began
with hostilities, but gradually cooled over time
as the settlers and Native peoples
of the region learned to cohabitate.
The Powhatan offered food
and friendship to the colonists who took the opportunity
to search the surrounding region for gold
and other precious metals.
Instead they found that the swampy region
that they had inhabited held no riches, but disease.
The people of Jamestown suffered from lack of coordination,
disease and the harshness of the environment around them,
despite the aid of the Powhatan people.
It was only when Captain John Smith took command
of the colony and in near dictatorial fashion,
reorganized their efforts to establish trade
with the Natives and plant crops of their own in
and around the colony.
Smith returned home to England not long
after his term as leader of the colony,
but he had established a path for the colonist to follow
that allowed Jamestown to endure difficult years
of famine and struggle.
Jamestown survived and by the mid 17th century was thriving
as more settlements began to grow around her.
Jamestown has the distinction
of being the first English settlement
to survive in the New World.
In 1619, 12 years after the colony's founding,
Jamestown became the site of yet another first
when the first African slaves arrived in Virginia.
20 to 30 enslaved Africans who had been captured
by English privateers from a Spanish slave ship were brought
to Point Comfort, Virginia.
From there, a number were sold
or traded to the settlement at Jamestown.
Slavery had existed in the New World since
the mid 16th century,
but this moment marked the beginning of two
and a half centuries of slavery
in what would become the United States.
The English continued their colonial settlement
in 1620 with the establishing
of the Puritan colony at Plymouth, Massachusetts.
Unlike the financially motivated London Company
at Jamestown, the Puritan colonists at Plymouth,
known as Pilgrims, had come to America in search
of religious freedom.
They voyaged across the Atlantic in the Mayflower,
suffering months of terrible weather at sea.
When they arrived in the New World,
they first landed near
what would become known as Provincetown.
There the colonists, concerned over their rights to the land
and their legal right to establish a colony,
drafted and signed the Mayflower Compact,
establishing their right
to self-govern while still holding allegiance
to the English crown.
However, without finding a reasonable place
to begin building their settlement and after a brief
but violent encounter with a local tribe,
the Puritans found Provincetown unfit
and sailed up the coast for better ground.
At last, they decided on Plymouth Harbor,
building upon an abandoned Patuxet settlement as a base
for their new home.
Settled between two hills
on which the colonists built two forts,
the colony at Plymouth initially struggled
through difficult winter, living aboard the Mayflower
and building their settlement by day.
In March, 1621, they made first contact
with the Wampanoag.
The Wampanoag Chief Massasoit was hesitant
to trust the Pilgrims.
Also uncertain of the Puritans was Squanto,
a Patuxet Native who had been taken in by the Wampanoag.
Squanto or Tisquantum spoke English
and had spent time in Europe
after he'd been kidnapped by an English explorer in 1614.
He had returned to America
with another explorer whose party was ambushed
and massacred by Massasoit and his tribe.
Working as an interpreter,
Squanto helped the Puritans in the Wampanoag reach
an agreement of non-aggression.
In the fall of 1621, the Pilgrims celebrated
what has become known as the first Thanksgiving,
along with Chief Massasoit and several of his men.
The celebration lasted for three days
and both parties procured
and presented various dishes of local game.
Like Jamestown, Plymouth was well run
and its early success was built upon
by enterprising companies and individuals in England.
More and more companies began crossing the Atlantic
and established new settlements.
Throughout the 17th century,
the English began spreading
as more colonies were formed
and amalgamated with their fellow English neighbors.
The Massachusetts Bay Colony, for example,
would absorb the Plymouth colony
and others as it grew in size.
As these settlements became more established,
trade opened with Europe and goods, money,
and more colonists poured into the New World.
Not to be outdone, other European powers attempted
to create their own permanent settlements
as they grabbed more
and more of the coastal region for themselves.
What started as small settlements along coastal waters soon
became large swaths of territory,
claimed in the name of kings and queens
from far-off European nations.
In 1614, the Dutch West India company began
to establish permanent settlements in the Northeast around
what would one day become New York and New Jersey.
Small settlements and fur trading outposts
on Governors Island
and along the Hudson and East Rivers marked
what was called New Netherlands.
In 1624, fearing military incursions
from other European powers,
they purchased the island
of Manhattan from the Munsee Lenape tribe for $24
and constructed Fort Amsterdam
at the southern tip of the island.
The settlement which grew within
and alongside the fort was called New Amsterdam.
The settlement utilized its unique environment
to expand trade and use hydropower to enhance its growth.
New Amsterdam was a city of trade
and commerce in its earliest form, and always would be.
It was a tempting target for the English who wanted control
of the Hudson for themselves.
In 1664, four English frigates sailed into the harbor
of New Amsterdam
and ordered the Dutch to surrender the city.
They did so bloodlessly,
although the event did spark the Second Anglo-Dutch War.
In June, 1665,
New Amsterdam was reincorporated under English law
and renamed New York City.
Spain, whose early discovery
of the New World gave them an advantage
in colonizing South America and the Caribbean began settling
in what would become the American Southeast.
From their earliest settlement in St. Augustine,
the Spanish traveled inward
toward their territorial conquests in Mexico
and upward toward Canada,
carving a path through the center
of the North American continent.
By the end of the 17th century,
Spain's North American empire would cover much
of the Deep South, Midwest,
and Western portions of the continent.
France, England's longtime rival
and chief competitor in North America,
set their sights for permanent settlement along
the Saint Lawrence River.
Still hoping for an easy path to the Pacific,
the settlements, Tadoussac, Quebec, Trois-Rivieres,
and Montreal followed the winding Saint Lawrence further
and further inland.
France established firm control
of the fur trade in the region.
Then began to extend its influence further
down the Mississippi River.
In the Gulf, the French established
a settlement along the bank
of the Mississippi called Nouvelle-Orleans or New Orleans.
New Orleans was established in 1718
and was the gateway to the Mississippi,
a crown jewel in France's North American empire.
(tense music)
As the 18th century began,
the numerous settlements continued to grow
as Europe carved up great swaths
of North America for their own.
These colonial territories were defined by various treaties
and agreements between the colonizing nations,
often ignoring the already existing Native population,
and the complex relationships
which already existed in North America.
Many Native Americans fought back.
Acting as opportunists,
tribes worked with and against European settlers,
often sparking conflict.
Raids on settlements were not uncommon
and the colonists could not always rely
on their far-flung colonial protectors
if these actions required a serious defense.
One of the largest and most violent
of these was King Philip's War.
In 1675 in the colony of New England,
war broke out after a significant failure
of diplomacy between the colonists
and the Wampanoag tribe and their allies.
Metacomet, son of Massasoit,
who had aided the Pilgrims at Plymouth Colony,
had become the grand sachem of the Wampanoag Confederacy
and did not have the same tolerance for the settlers
as his father had.
Disagreements over livestock, intrusion on Wampanoag land,
and the presence of colonial missionaries attempting
to convert Natives to Christianity was the last straw
for Metacomet who, unlike his father,
saw only danger in the existence
of these settlers on their land.
An alliance of Algonquians tribes led
by Metacomet struck at,
not only New England's far-flung countryside settlements,
but the larger, more established towns as well.
With no English soldiers stationed in the colonies,
the New England Militia mobilized to defend their homes.
The militia targeted native villages knowing
that it would enrage and damage the Indian's ability
to wage war.
Metacomet was killed in 1676,
just a year into the war.
His death spelled doom for the Wampanoag
and their Narraganset allies
with no one guiding the conflict,
things quickly turned in the favor
of the New England Militia who all
but destroyed the Wampanoag people
and forced their allies out of the New England territory.
It was the bloodiest conflict in North America to date.
In the wake of King Philip's war,
tension between the English colonists and their French
and Dutch neighbors grew high.
In the Northeast,
five native tribes located north
of the New England colony formed the Wabanaki Confederation
after witnessing the demise
of their Southern Wampanoag neighbors in King Philip's War,
increasing tensions with the English colonists.
In 1689, just two years after King Philip's War had ended,
the colonists were at war again,
this time at the behest of their mother countries.
Fighting broke out as the English-backed Iroquois tribes
attacked French settlements
and the French-backed Wabanaki attacked English ones.
As French and English soldiers made their way
to the New World, the colonists of New England
and New France prepared to fight each other.
Known as King William's War,
the conflict dragged on for nearly a decade
and saw French successes in the colony of New York
and English successes in Acadia,
later known as Nova Scotia,
and along the Saint Lawrence River.
Neither side was able to take their main goal.
For the French, Boston,
for the English, Quebec, and the war concluded in 1697.
But King William's War was only the beginning.
It was the first of four major conflicts
between France and England,
which pitted their various Native allies
against one another, and peace was not kept for long.
In 1701, King Charles II,
the last Habsburg king of Spain died with no direct heir
and a confusing web of potential replacements bound
by secret treaties
and backroom agreements.
English, Austrian, Prussian and Dutch powers scrambled
to stop the French from taking control
of the Spanish throne.
Known as the War of Spanish Succession
or Queen Anne's war in North America,
the conflict originated in Europe,
and did not take long for the fighting to come
to the shores of North America.
In the South, Spanish Florida
and French colonists in Louisiana were engaged
by English colonists from the province of Carolina.
The fighting decimated the Native populations of the region
and helped secure English control of Georgia.
In New England, the Wabanaki again sided with the French
and continuous raids on New English settlements plagued
the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
Concerted efforts made
by the English military once again failed
to capture Quebec City,
but made considerable gains in Acadia.
The fighting in North America had little effect
on the war's ultimate outcome in Europe,
but more than 13 years
of continuous fighting wreaked havoc
throughout North America,
permanently damaging Native
and colonial communities alike.
In the end, the French would give away vital territory
to the English, including the Hudson River Valley,
Acadia, and Newfoundland.
These concessions did not include
the various Native tribes engaged on either side of the war
and set the stage for future conflicts.
For nearly three decades,
there was relative peace
between the major European powers in North America.
In this time, the colonies grew larger
and more complex, forming their own colonial governments,
and expanding a new
and thriving North American economy of agriculture,
textile production, and maritime trade.
As the value of the North American colonies grew,
it did alongside her South American
and Caribbean neighbors.
Valuable gold and silver had been found in South America
and the Caribbean produced commodities which were
by now a necessity in Europe
and North America, namely molasses and other sugar products.
The production of these commodities, of course,
was powered by the sweat of slave labor.
By now, the American colonies were all engaged
in what was known as the triangle trade.
Slaves from Africa were brought to the Americas
where these slave ships would deposit African slaves
for sale and take on cargo of sugar bound for New England.
These ships would then sell the sugar and slaves
and take on rum, tobacco, cotton and other goods
and return to Africa to trade them for slaves.
On and on it went,
an evermore valuable and grotesque sale of human lives.
Slavery was rampant in the Caribbean and South America
and grew rapidly in North American colonies as well.
From the first years
of North American colonization in the early 1600s
to the mid 18th century,
the number of slaves imported
to the Americas had increased from roughly 300,000
from 1600 to 1625 to more than 2 million
from 1751 to 1775.
The increased value
of the Americas led directly to the third
of the Indian wars.
Like Queen Anne's War before it,
the conflict began well outside of North America.
Distrustful of the Spanish control
of the South American market,
the British were displeased
by the mercantile stranglehold Spain had over trade
to South America and the Caribbean.
Likewise, the Spanish were displeased
with British encroachment in North America on
what they believed was their territory north of Florida.
After the 1721 founding of the Colony of Georgia,
following Queen Anne's War,
the Spanish were convinced
that the British had designs on removing them from Florida.
Spanish vessels began boarding British trading ships,
searching for contraband.
While this action was legal due to past treaties,
the boardings resulted in increased tensions
between the two powers.
In 1731, the British brig, Rebecca,
was stopped off the coast
of Cuba and boarded for inspection of contraband cargo.
Onboard, the Spanish officials found
an illegal cargo of sugar.
Rebecca's captain, a man named Robert Jenkins,
alleged that during the search,
he had been tortured by the Spanish officials
and had had his ear partially cut off.
While the Royal Navy would admit that Jenkins was at fault
for carrying illegal cargo,
his story, told before the Houses of Parliament in England,
struck a nerve.
In 1739, the British found that, among other reasons,
the Spanish were guilty
of depredations upon British subjects
and commenced war against the Spanish in the Americas,
known as the War of Jenkins' Ear.
The conflict saw little action on North American shores
with the bulk of the fighting occurring in South America
and the Caribbean as the British Navy attempted to capture
and claim multiple Spanish forts and port towns.
Fighting between the British colonists
in the Carolinas and Georgia
and the Spanish colonists in Florida came too little fruit
for either side and again,
only appeared to do the worst harm
to the local Indian tribes
who fought on either side.
In 1742, another war broke out in Europe.
This time between Prussia
and Austria over control of Silesia.
Once again, a question of the right
of succession brought all of Europe's great powers into war.
The death of Emperor Charles VI of Austria
had left a power vacuum in central Europe
with Great Britain, the Dutch Republic, Hanover,
and Russia supporting Charles VI's daughter,
Maria Theresa as is heir, and France, Spain, Prussia,
and Sweden supporting Charles Albert of Bavaria
who believed he had the right of inheritance.
This war, known as King George's War in North America,
and the War of Austrian Succession in Europe,
swallowed everything in its wake,
including the War of Jenkins' Ear.
As war raged in Europe, France and England once again turned
their attention toward their North American territories.
As before, the Wabanaki Confederacy
and the Iroquois Confederacy allied themselves
with the French and British,
hoping to affect some great change
for their rapidly shrinking continent.
Fighting focused once again over control
of Acadia and the Saint Lawrence River.
In 1745, the British colonists achieved
the first substantial gain in the last 50 years
of colonial warfare
with the capture of Fortress Louisbourg
at the mouth of the Saint Lawrence River.
Fighting stretched down
into the Colony of New York as well as New England.
The war took an awful toll on the British colonists,
particularly in the final years of fighting.
When the war at last came to an end in 1748,
the British colonists were forced to return Louisbourg
to the French, infuriating the colonists
who had won it at an excessive cost of life.
Once again, after years of violence,
the borders were returned to their pre-war status
with nothing having been gained.
Territorial disputes went unsettled, grudges continued,
and the situation in the North American back country
was still violent as English colonists, French colonists,
and Native American tribes all vied for control
of the wilderness.
The undefined borders between British
and French colonies had long been
an issue between the two nations.
Yet despite multiple conflicts,
no formal agreement had been reached
as far as definitively laying out who owned what.
It was only a matter of time before war broke out again.
(uplifting music)
In late 1753, the lieutenant governor
of the Virginia Colony, Robert Dinwitty,
ordered a young Virginia major named George Washington
to remove French colonial troops from forts
in the Ohio River Valley.
The Colony of Virginia claimed this territory as its own
and felt that it was within their right
to vacate the French from the forts,
which still dotted the region
from the last century of fighting.
The expedition resulted in a French rejection
of Virginia's demands.
And Washington, who was promoted to lieutenant colonel
upon his return, was once again sent into
the Ohio River Valley
to remove the French from their forts.
By force, if necessary.
In April 1754,
French troops learned from their Native allies,
the Mingos that a small British fort had been built
by colonial militia at the forts of the Ohio River.
French troops marched to the fort and captured it.
They built in its place a much later fortification,
which they named Fort Duquesne.
Meanwhile, further south in the valley,
Colonel Washington and his small force of colonial militia
and Natives, allied to the English,
came upon and engaged an encampment
of unsuspecting French troops.
The French were quickly overwhelmed
and later explained that they had been sent
to intercept Washington peacefully
and to warn him of his apparent incursion in
what they believed was French territory.
To Washington's surprise,
the leader of the Native forces accompanying him,
Tanaghrisson, attacked and killed
the wounded French commander,
likely due to a longstanding hatred of the French.
Washington feared the French would attack
and constructed a small fort, which he named Fort Necessity.
Necessity was, as Washington predicted,
quickly surrounded by French troops from Duquesne
and forced to surrender.
This small skirmish set the world on fire.
Lieutenant Governor Dinwitty called
for aid from his fellow colonies
and from the British government back in England.
Fearing that the incursion
would strengthen French claims to the region,
the British Government immediately sent troops
to strike at the various French forts still in
and around the Saint Lawrence River
and the Ohio River Valley.
The French sent additional forces to North America
to hold off the inevitable British invasion.
Quite suddenly, France and England were once again at war.
Multiple early British forays into the Ohio River Valley
and Canada failed spectacularly.
Early into the war,
it seemed as though the French would be able
to secure their holdings in North America
and even found success in capturing a number
of critical British forts in the colony of New York,
including Fort Ticonderoga and Fort William Henry.
In 1758, fortunes changed for the English
as the complicated system of entangled alliances produced
by the past century of war finally ignited
the Seven Years' War.
The fighting in the Ohio River Valley,
known as the French and Indian War in America,
had launched the largest European land war to date
with every major European power
of the era engaged.
Millions of soldiers
and thousands of naval vessels were activated for duty.
Fighting stretched not only across North American
but to Europe, the Caribbean, India, and Asia.
As the French were forced to direct their attention
to Europe and to other more valuable parts of their empire,
the British were able
to take advantage on the North American front.
With the British Navy actively keeping the French
from not being able to resupply
along the Saint Lawrence River,
British and American colonial forces successfully
captured Fort Niagara, Fortress Louisbourg,
and the City of Quebec.
As the French lost more
and more ground, it became clear that the fight
for North America was over.
In 1760, British General Jeffrey Amherst managed
to secure a formal surrender
from the Governor of New France,
Pierre Francois de Rigaud Marquis de Vaudreuil-Cavagnal,
and largely ended the hostilities in North America.
Meanwhile, the Seven Years' War continued abroad
and continued to carve pieces
from the Kingdom of France and her allies.
In 1763, the Seven Years' War officially came to an end,
and the French and Indian War with it.
Casualties were astronomical for the period
with some estimates reaching as high as 1.4 million.
Of that number,
the French and Indian War accounted
for roughly 23,000 killed, wounded, or captured.
Just under 2% of the total casualties
of the global conflict.
For nearly a century, England had beaten back the French,
Dutch and Spanish Empires gradually cementing
its claim to the New World.
Over the course of the 18th century,
the successes of the British Empire
during these conflicts had created the ideal conditions
for their colonies in North America
to experience an incredible population boom
from roughly 250,000 in 1700
to more than 1.25 million in 1750.
The raw materials produced by the American colonies,
including hemp, copper,
and tar were necessary for the British Army
and Navy to wage war and protect the vastly growing empire.
While it was in the interest of the British Empire
to defeat the French
and secure their North American holdings,
it had also been in the colonists' interests.
The English colonists had no great love for the French
and anti-Catholic sentiment was a regular part
of colonial life, especially in places like New England,
which had been staunchly Protestant
for the first two centuries of its settlement.
That the American colonies were made up chiefly
of individuals of the Protestant faith
was naturally no coincidence.
Many Protestant organizations had funded
the various colonization efforts through the 17th century
and had maintained a lasting impact
in presence into the 1700s.
However, the strongest impact
of Protestantism in the American colonies came
during the colonial wars,
which dominated the early and mid 18th century.
A global religious phenomenon occurred,
known as the Great Awakening gripped both Europe
and North America
and brought the Protestant faith to new heights.
(suspenseful music)
The Great Awakening was a major evangelical revival
which expanded the Protestant faith throughout Europe
and Colonial North America.
The revival brought about new religious theories
and dogma as concepts such as the nature of salvation
and the idea of rebirth were spread by itinerant preachers
who traveled the countryside giving sermons
and lectures as they saw fit.
These preachers were tremendous orators
and captured captive audiences wherever they went.
George Whitfield, a major player
in this evangelical movement,
traveled across the colonies and preached in major cities
and small towns, wherever he could gather a crowd.
And gather them he did.
In October, 1740, while preaching in Boston, Massachusetts,
Whitfield allegedly drew a crowd
of more than 30,000 people from around New England.
To put that in perspective,
Boston was the highest populated city
in Colonial North America in 1740,
coming in at roughly 17,000 people living in
and around the city.
Nearly double the city's population was present
to hear Whitfield speak.
The movement revived the religious spirit
of Christian peoples
and reaffirmed their faith through periods
of intense conflict and uncertain survival.
While the revival did not change governments
or raise great armies
as religious revivals had done in the past in Europe,
the Great Awakening was formative
for many individuals in colonial North America,
many of whom would go on to be the founding fathers
and mothers of the nation.
(uplifting music)
The 1763 Treaty of Paris
saw enormous territorial gains for Great Britain.
Vast swaths of formerly French-occupied land
were now British colonies, including Canada,
all of the Louisiana Territory east of the Mississippi,
and many Caribbean islands.
The British colonists in North America were ecstatic
as the land of the West would soon be open
for settlement and development.
The land, however, was already occupied,
namely by the many Iroquois and other Native tribes
who had fought alongside the British during the war.
To avoid any incidents,
King George III issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763,
which forbade any settlement west
of a line drawn along the Appalachian Mountains,
known as the Proclamation Line.
Effectively, the British had created an Indian reserve
to the West of the Appalachians and east of the Mississippi.
This did not sit well with American colonists
who felt that they had fought the French
and Indian War to gain access to this land.
Naturally, many ignored the proclamation
and settled West, increasing tension between themselves
and the Natives, much to the dismay
of British colonial authorities.
Relations between the British government
and the American colonists became increasingly strained
through the 1760s.
As Great Britain attempted to regain control
of their economy,
the Seven Years' War had grown from a territorial dispute
into a full-fledged global conflict
with a cost to go with it.
To pay off the war debt,
the British Parliament levied a series of acts
and taxes against the colonies
in order to try and regain their lost financial footing.
The colonists, who viewed themselves as loyal subjects
to the British crown, became increasingly agitated.
It was not that the taxes were exorbitantly high.
In fact, they were quite low,
and often the measures taken
by the British Government were taken to lower the cost
of British goods
and raise the costs of those being sold by their French
or Dutch competitors.
For the colonists, the heart of the issue was not the cost,
but rather the lack of consultation before levying
the acts and taxes.
As British subjects,
the colonists believed they had all of the rights
and liberties of any British citizen,
which included representation.
The British Government argued
that the colonists were represented virtually
and that the Parliament acted in their best interests.
Many Americans did not agree and resentment began to grow.
The rallying cry became, no taxation without representation,
as more and more colonists began to view King George III
as a tyrant and the British Parliament
as an aggressor toward them.
Great Britain had always regulated the economies
of its respective colonies
through acts and laws passed by parliament.
Through the last century,
these laws had only been loosely enforced
as the economic gains
of the American colonies also benefit Great Britain.
As the 1760s began, however,
Britain needed to regain control
of the financial situation,
sparking animosity from the colonists
who had long appreciated their free economic relationship
and raising questions on the constitutional rights
of the American colonists.
In 1764, the Sugar Act was imposed to regulate the amount
of French and Dutch sugar
and molasses being imported to the colonies
in favor of sugar and molasses being sold
by the British East India Company.
While it lowered the cost
of sugar from the East India Company,
colonists saw the act as a violation
of their rights to trade and conduct business.
Colonists protested the Sugar Act
by boycotting British goods affected by the act.
While this form of protest was not widely successful
from an economic standpoint- the East India Company had one
of its best years in 1774-
the protest was noted by British Parliament
and many Whigs within the British government warned
that relations could worsen if some sort
of agreement could not be met.
The following year in 1765,
the Parliament passed the Stamp Act.
It was the first act
of Parliament ever directed specifically at the colonies,
as opposed to across the empire.
The Stamp Act would require any form of official paper
to need an official stamp.
The act affected newspapers, almanacs,
and official documents such as licenses, deeds, and wills.
It even meant that playing cards required
the official stamp.
Such a direct tax had never been levied
against the colonists, and many saw it as an attack
by the Parliament in response
to the boycotts the year before.
Secret organizations known
as the Sons of Liberty began to appear
throughout the colonies
and threatened violence on anyone who sold the stamps.
Indeed, violence began to break out across the region
as the Sons of Liberty targeted British officials
who enforced the act.
In one such case, the home of Lieutenant Governor
of the province of Massachusetts Bay
and Chief Justice Thomas Hutchinson was ransacked
by an angry mob led by the Sons of Liberty.
While Hutchinson and his family escaped the violence,
their home was destroyed.
Some colonists, however, did not act out in violence
but relied instead on a united political action.
Nine colonies sent representatives
to the Stamp Act Congress in New York City
and compiled a declaration of rights
and grievances for the British Parliament.
The declaration stated the position of many
of the American colonists,
stating that the British taxes levied without representation
violated their rights as not only British subjects,
but as men.
Again, the Americans engaged in protest by boycott.
This time with significant results.
The income from imports
to the American colonies fell from 2,250,000 pounds
in 1764 to 1,944,000 in 1765.
In England, American Statesman Benjamin Franklin argued
the case of the American colonies to parliament
and warned that continued abuse of the colonists could
and would result in rebellion.
Fortunately for the colonies,
the Parliament experienced a shift in government,
which had sympathy for Whig politics,
which resulted in the repeal of the Stamp Act.
The Parliament passed the Declaratory Act in 1766,
reversing the Stamp Act,
but at the same time, insisting that the Parliament,
as a legislative body, had the right in power to make laws
for the colonies in all cases whatsoever.
Both sides viewed the result as a political victory,
believing that their interpretation of the rights
of the colonists had been heard and secured.
The Parliament believed it had exerted its will
as the governing body of the colonies and once
and for all had established their right
to levy laws on them,
and the Americans believed that the British Parliament
would not ever directly tax them again
without some form of representation.
A door had been left open
and if the British Government was not careful,
it might be able to close again.
In 1767, things were still not going well economically
for the British.
The Rockingham Government,
which had helped repeal the Stamp Act,
was suffering at the hands of their Tory opponents,
who criticized them harshly
and felt that they had been played
by the American colonists.
Charles Townsend, who served as the chancellor
of the Exchequer to the ministry
of William Pitt the Elder,
found himself in control of the administration
when Pitt suddenly passed away in 1766.
Townsend himself died a year later,
but before he did, urged by the financial crisis
and the insistence of the Tory factions within Parliament,
passed a series
of five acts which would collectively bear his name,
The Townsend Acts.
The first act known as the Revenue Act
imposed direct taxation on lead, glass, paper, paint,
and, notably, tea.
The second created a new customs board
for the North American colonies in Boston
and allowed customs officials unprecedented control
over vessels coming in and out of colonial ports.
The third suspended the New York Assembly
from conducting business until it had complied
with the requirements of the Quartering Act passed
in 1765 alongside the Stamp Act.
The fourth act, known as the Indemnity Act,
colloquially known as the Tea Act,
lowered the commercial duties on tea imported
by the East India Company,
hoping to combat the smuggling
of Dutch East India tea into English ports.
The final act, known as the Colonial Trade Act,
passed after Townsend's death in 1767,
also aimed to target smuggling,
and granted admiralty courts jurisdiction
over all matters concerning customs violations,
taking away the authority of local colonial courts.
Before his death, Townsend feared that it would provoke
a rebellious response from the American colonists.
Townsend could not have been more correct.
A flurry of activity gripped the American colonies.
Pamphlets and letters flew from the pens of lawyers
and farmers alike, as they published their grievances
in papers and broadsides across the colonies.
Committees of correspondence were formed and shared ideas
and debated the political
and economic situation in the colonies.
Once again, the Sons of Liberty were active,
implementing the boycott of British goods and inciting riots
where the opportunity was ripe.
Particularly in Boston, unrest began to foment
in such a way
that the customs officials were obliged to leave town.
This prompted British authorities to send for British troops
to occupy Boston to quell the mob.
On March 5th, 1770,
the consequences became quite clear
when a young British sentry guarding
the Boston Customs House was set upon
by an angry mob of colonists.
Accounts of the event state that the incident began
as an argument between the private
and a young wig maker's apprentice,
who upon insulting the private and his officer
was warned away from the post.
Refusing to go and further insulting the officer,
he was struck in the head by the private's musket.
A crowd began to gather as the altercation grew louder
and bells rang out indicating a fire,
drawing yet more Bostonians toward the lone sentry.
The sentry sent a runner to get help
as the crowd became more violent,
throwing ice and oyster shells at the century
and calling for him to fire his weapon.
Captain Thomas Preston
and a handful of men from the Grenadier Company
of the 29th Regiment, afoot, arrived at the scene
and deployed around the sentry with bayonets fixed.
The crowd, now grown to 300 or 400 by some estimates,
pressed in around the British troops,
still throwing objects and shouting for them to fire.
Preston shouted for the crowd to disperse
and ordered his men to load their muskets.
As the crowd pressed in on Preston
and his men, they shouted, "Fire, damn you, fire."
A young private was struck in the head
by a flying object, causing him to drop his musket.
He bent to retrieve it and stood up
and unintentionally fired into the crowd without orders.
In a panic, the rest of the soldiers fired
into the crowd in a ragged volley.
As the crowd broke in horror
and the smoke cleared, it revealed three dead colonists:
Samuel Gray, James Caldwell,
and Crispus Attucks,
a mixed race former slave, Samuel Maverick,
and Patrick Carr were wounded and would die shortly after.
Five colonists had been killed in
what would be known as the Boston Massacre.
The city was put on high alert
and British troops mustered in full force,
preparing to defend against further riots.
The trial which followed was a media circus
as the Sons of Liberty latched onto those
who had died as patriots and martyrs.
Attorney John Adams defended the British soldiers,
despite his own personal feelings toward
the British abuse of the American colonies
and his relationship to his cousin, Samuel Adams,
who was one of the founding members of the Sons of Liberty.
Adams, whose devout loyalty to the law led him to believe
that all men were entitled to a trial no matter
who they were or what they had done,
successfully argued the men were not guilty of murder
and had six of these soldiers acquitted
and two others found guilty only of manslaughter.
Adam's experience in the aftermath of the trial did little
to move him closer to his cousin's patriot leanings,
but did affirm his belief in the legitimacy
of a government of laws.
Tensions remained high in Boston,
but gradually began to recede elsewhere.
In 1773, amidst one of the worst banking crisis
of the 18th century,
the British Parliament again made an attempt
to ensure the survival of the British East India Company
by undercutting the illegal importation of Dutch tea
to the American colonies,
while lowering the cost of EIC Tea
to the lowest possible amount.
Known as the Tea Act of 1773,
the act allowed the EIC to unload its cargo
in the American colonies
without paying any duties on it,
while charging an exorbitant amount on Dutch tea.
The act prompted the Sons of Liberty
to organize a raid on three merchant ships docked
in Boston Harbor, carrying loads of East India Company Tea,
which had yet to be offloaded.
Known as the Boston Tea Party,
the Sons of Liberty boarded the ships
and dumped 342 crates of tea into the harbor.
The loss of tea amounted
to approximately 9,659 pounds
in 1773, the equivalent of 1.7 million US dollars today.
Parliament was outraged
and responded by passing a series of acts known
as the Intolerable Acts in 1774.
The first three acts, the Boston Port Act,
the Massachusetts Government Act,
and the Administration of Justice Act,
all targeted Massachusetts alone
and punished the City of Boston
and the Massachusetts Bay Colony
for its role in the Tea Party.
The Boston Port Act closed the port of Boston
until the colonists paid for the destroyed tea.
The act angered citizens in Boston
who had not even participated in the Tea Party
and they felt they were being punished unjustly
without being able to testify in their own defense.
The Massachusetts Government Act
revoked Massachusetts Charter
and brought the colony under direct British control.
Town meetings were limited
and all appointments had to be appointed
by the Royal governor.
The Administration of Justice Act allowed the Royal governor
of Massachusetts to order the trial
or retrial of any royal official
to take place in Great Britain if the accused could not get
a fair trial in Massachusetts.
The final act, which affected all of the colonies,
was the Quartering Act of 1774,
which allowed royal governors to house soldiers
and buildings if suitable quarters
were not provided by the colonies.
These acts were the last straw for many colonists.
The perceived violation of what they viewed as their natural
and constitutional rights as British subjects threatened
to turn resentment of their British mother country
to hatred and send the colonists into rebellion.
Parliament hoped that the intolerable acts would isolate
the problem which seemed to be
the strongest in Massachusetts.
Meanwhile, the colonists began taking steps
beyond simple committees of correspondence.
The formation of the first Continental Congress
in the fall of 1774 worked to redress the intolerable acts
and petitioned the British Government for a repeal,
as they had in 1765 with the Stamp Act.
The petition to the king never received a formal reply.
With no reply from the British Government.
In May, 1775, the colonies convened again.
The Second Continental Congress found itself
again attempting to organize
a general boycott of British goods
and achieve some kind
of formal response from the Parliament
when the tension which had gripped the American colonies
since the end of the French and Indian War finally reached
a breaking point in a small village outside of Boston
on a mild mid-April morning in 1775.
(suspenseful music)
On the evening of April 18th, 1775,
with tensions running high between the people of Boston
and the British troops garrisoned
in and around the city, the Sons of Liberty discovered
that General Thomas Gage planned to march British troops
to a cache of weapons
and powder hidden in Concord, just a few miles from Boston,
and destroy the supply.
Patriots Paul Revere and William Dawes rode
through the Boston countryside
and warned the population that the regulars are turning out,
or as it's more popularly remembered,
the British are coming.
Colonial militia men rose from their slumber,
gathered their muskets and rushed
to stop the British troops from making it to Concord.
On the morning of April 19th, 1775,
Massachusetts militia men faced off against British regulars
on the Lexington Town Green.
When ordered to lay down their arms
and return to their homes,
the militia refused and stood their ground.
Captain John Parker, commanding the group of 70
or so Massachusetts militia ordered them not
to fire unless fired upon first.
British officers ordered their men to level their muskets,
but cautioned them not to fire.
Suddenly, a shot rang out.
No one knows where the shot came from.
Neither side laid claim,
both blaming the other.
With this moment, known as the shot heard around the world,
the resentment and anger boiled over at last
and the war began.
When the American Revolution began,
it did not start as a revolution.
While certainly the ideas it generated were revolutionary,
the actions of the first Continental Congress were those
of a legislative body hoping to attain
a form of reconciliation with the mother country.
Better characterized as a rebellion,
the earliest stages of the war were fought by the colonists
to reclaim what they saw as their natural-born rights
as British subjects and citizens.
On the home front,
early victories for the militias kept the spark
of rebellion lit.
However, it was not long
before the British put a concerted effort
into putting down the uprising.
At the Battle of Bunker Hill in June, 1775,
British troops stormed earthworks held
by the colonial militia near Boston in a costly victory.
It was becoming clear to many
that if the colonies did not unify,
they would be crushed one by one.
While some representatives in the Continental Congress,
now in its second session,
still erred on the side of caution,
believing that a reconciliation could still be made,
the Congress made the decision to form a single unified army
to prevent their forces from being wiped out piecemeal.
At the head of this new Continental Army would be
a colonel from the colony
of Virginia named George Washington.
Washington, born from one of the most prominent families
in colonial Virginia,
had had aspirations to be a naval officer
in the English Navy when he was a young man.
His mother, Mary Ball Washington, was wary.
She knew that a life at sea was a difficult one
and could lead to an early death or maiming.
She implored her son not to enlist in the Navy
and to pursue a career in the Army instead.
Washington obeyed and would spend much
of his young adult life attempting
to gain a commission in the British Army.
He worked as a surveyor
and endeared himself to the royal governor of Virginia,
hoping to obtain that commission.
It never came.
Instead, Washington served
as a colonel in the Virginia Militia
and implemented his own particular style of leadership,
modeled after the British.
Serving in this capacity,
a young George Washington found himself
at the center of some of the most important moments
of the French and Indian War.
At Fort Necessity
and the Battle of Monongahela,
Washington served alongside British soldiers
as a colonial officer.
And despite surviving numerous close calls with death
and leading his troops valiantly,
he was never made an official offer
for a commission in the British Army.
More than a decade after the end
of the French and Indian War,
Washington was serving as a representative
of Virginia at the Second Continental Congress.
When it came time for the Congress to decide
who would lead this new United Army,
Washington was a natural choice.
While his track record on the battlefield
was less than stellar, his experience was unquestioned,
and the fact that he was a Virginian pleased many
of the Southern delegates of the Congress,
as the war thus far had been fought by,
and almost entirely took place in the Northern colonies.
In June, 1775, after receiving a unanimous vote
of approval from the Congress,
Washington rode north for Boston,
and began to construct the necessary administration
for the new Continental Army.
The Continental Army struggled with many issues.
Supply was always a chief concern.
Lack of food and a reliable supply chain meant
that the army needed to constantly forage for sustenance.
This meant a tense and sometimes violent relationship
with the civilian populations near
where the armies had camped.
Command differences plagued the army as well.
Beyond disgruntled and entitled officers,
this army consisted
of troops from nearly every once colony on the East Coast.
These soldiers were as different from each other
as if they had come from another country.
In one early instance, General Washington literally had
to pull soldiers off of each other during
a snowball fight outside of Boston,
which had turned into an outright brawl
between soldiers from Massachusetts and Virginia.
Uniting these men into a fighting force
was a war unto itself.
(uplifting music)
Through the winter of 1775 to '76,
the Continental Army diverted its efforts in two directions.
To the North, the Congress ordered an invasion
of Quebec under the command of Generals Benedict Arnold
and Richard Montgomery, hoping to rally the Canadians
to form a 14th colony, and rise against the British as well.
It did not go as planned.
And while successes were made in Upstate New York,
the invasion ultimately ended in a dismal failure.
Montgomery was killed
and the majority of continental force was either captured
or succumbed to smallpox.
Meanwhile, Washington stayed with the army around Boston
and managed the siege.
With 11,000 British troops trapped in the city,
Washington hoped the winter would force them to surrender,
but he lacked the artillery to mount a full-scale siege.
He sent the young Colonel Henry Knox to acquire artillery
from the recently captured Fort Ticonderoga
and in March, 1776,
Knox returned to Boston having successfully gotten the guns
over the Berkshire Mountains through the winter.
With Knox's guns looking down from Dorchester Heights,
the British decided to evacuate the city.
On March 17th, 1776,
the Continental Army reoccupied Boston,
much to the joy of the civilian population.
In the spring of 1776,
the war was beginning to spread
to other parts of the 13 colonies.
Fighting had broken out in the Carolinas
and a British siege of Charleston was thwarted
by a daring defense of Sullivan's Island.
In upstate New York,
the survivors of the Canada Expedition fought
to hold onto the gains they had made at Fort Ticonderoga
and other key locations on Lake Champlain.
Washington's forces in Boston moved south
to occupy New York City.
The Continental Congress ordered Washington
to defend the island city,
despite the lack of a meaningful navy.
Washington was uncertain his army,
many of whom were untrained and undisciplined militia,
was going to be capable of standing up
to a British assault on the city.
In Philadelphia, now the American capital,
the Second Continental Congress had shifted from
a government body imploring the British Government
for a redress of grievances to a government body responsible
for the management of a war.
The Olive Branch Petition sent
to England in July, 1775 had been the last attempt
of the Congress to make peace with the mother country.
It had been met with the naming of the Congress as traitors
and the revolution as illegal.
After the action in Boston, it had become clear to a faction
of the Congress, led by John Adams, Benjamin Franklin,
Thomas Jefferson, and others,
that a return to the pre-war status the American colonies
in Great Britain had shared, was no longer a possibility.
The necessity for self-rule
had surpassed any possible reconciliation with England.
Many of the representatives also realized
that victory in this conflict could only be achieved
with the assistance of a foreign power, namely France.
They knew France would not intervene on behalf
of rebel colonists, but they might for a sovereign nation.
Consequently, by early summer 1776,
the majority of the provincial congresses were prepared
for a complete separation.
On June 11th, the Congress formed a committee
to draft a document stating the justification
on their separation from Britain.
The Declaration of Independence was written largely
by Thomas Jefferson of Virginia.
It laid out in plain words the reason
for the former colonies', now state's,
desire for separation
and affirm the assertion that they had every right as men
to make the separation.
After considerable revisions
to the original drafts,
including the removal of a section condemning
the British slave trade,
the declaration was adopted by Congress on July 2nd, 1776,
and its final wording,
formally ratified on July 4th, 1776.
Its most prolific line read,
"We hold these truths to be self-evident,
that all men are created equal,
that they are endowed
by their creator with certain unalienable rights,
that among these are life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness."
The Declaration changed the shape
of the war from a rebellion to a full-fledged revolution.
The new colonies began operating as separate
and autonomous states bound loosely
by their unified Congress.
Washington had the declaration read
to his soldiers in New York City, spirit soared.
At last, the soldiers of the Continental Army felt
they had something to band together for, independence.
The British struck back in August, 1776,
launching a series of devastating attacks in
and around New York City.
As Washington had feared, his army was not prepared
for the professional and well-disciplined British troops,
and without a navy,
he had no hope of defending the Island of Manhattan.
After five consecutive defeats,
Washington was forced to abandon New York City
to the British
and began a prolonged and bloody retreat into New Jersey
and across the Delaware River into Pennsylvania
in late November 1776.
Lord William Howe,
the commander of the British troops in North America,
pursued Washington into New Jersey
and established a series of garrisons,
which stretched from New York
as far south as Mount Holly.
Washington knew that if he did not act quickly,
the war would be over.
He devised a plan
to cross the Delaware on December 25th, 1776,
and attack an exposed garrison in Trenton, New Jersey,
occupied by a brigade of German troops hired by the British,
known as Hessians.
Washington crossed the Delaware
on Christmas night through a blinding nor'easter
and marched his tired and beleaguered army south to Trenton.
The Hessians were surprised by the arrival
of the Continental Army as fighting
and maneuvering troops through the winter
was generally viewed as difficult and dangerous
for 18th century armies.
He achieved a swift victory fighting through the streets
of Trenton and won his first battle as commander
of the Continental Army.
Nine days later,
after a tactically brilliant running engagement
on January 2nd,
the Continental Army again achieved victory
on the morning of January 3rd in Princeton, New Jersey.
The three battles fought kept the revolution alive
in its darkest hour.
In 1777, the British were desperate to regain control
of the situation and launched two separate offensives.
The British, led by Sir William Howe,
captured the American capital of Philadelphia
after defeating Washington at Brandywine
and Germantown in the fall of 1777.
While the loss of the capital was a blow to the morale
of the Continental Army, the army had not fallen apart,
as Howe had expected,
and Washington took his forces
to winter at Valley Forge,
just a few miles west of Philadelphia.
In upstate New York,
British General John Burgoyne pushed his army south
from Canada, capturing Fort Ticonderoga
and hoping to sever New England from the rest
of the United States in order
to bring about a swift end to the war.
Instead, Burgoyne faced off
against Continental General's Benedict Arnold
and Horatio Gates, fighting a series
of battles near Saratoga, New York.
Thanks to impressive leadership by Arnold
and sound strategy by Gates,
Burgoyne's army was defeated
and ultimately forced to surrender in October, 1777.
It was the largest British army to ever surrender
to an enemy force to date, nearly 7,000 men.
The British surrender at Saratoga paired
with the twin victories
of Trenton in Princeton from the previous winter campaign,
convinced the French that this new country,
these United States, did indeed have a chance
of winning the war.
Eager to get revenge after a century of losing
to the British,
the French declared a formal military alliance
with the United States, declaring war on Great Britain
and legitimizing the Declaration of Independence
in one fell swoop.
Great Britain was about to become embroiled
in a global conflict again.
Meanwhile, Washington spent the winter of 1777
to '78 training the Continental Army
to fight the way European armies did.
He was aided by the help from foreign officers
like the Marquis de Lafayette of France
and the Baron von Steuben from Prussia.
Steuben in particular instilled a sense
of pride in the soldiers and trained them well.
In 1778, when word came of the formal alliance with France,
the British abandoned Philadelphia
and rushed back toward New York.
Their new commander, Sir Henry Clinton,
did not have a high opinion of the Continental Army,
but did have a healthy respect for the French,
and feared their presence would trap
the English in Philadelphia.
Washington pounced as the British withdrew
through New Jersey.
His a newly-trained fighting force struck Clinton
at Monmouth, New Jersey on June 28th, 1778,
and fought the British to a standstill.
While the Battle of Monmouth was a stalemate,
Washington's forces had fought well
and withstood the British in an open field engagement.
The British withdrew back
to New York and would not venture into New Jersey
in a meaningful way again.
In 1779, the British began to feel the pressure
of a global conflict.
Realizing that the war could not be won in the North,
the British turned their attention to the South,
hoping to find more loyalist support.
British forces captured Savannah
and Charleston in the fall of 1779
and soundly defeated General Horatio Gates
at the Battle of Camden in South Carolina.
Gates was removed from command
and one of Washington's trusted lieutenants,
General Nathaniel Greene,
was placed in command of the Southern Department.
Greene knew that the local population was not nearly
as loyalist as the British expected
and relied on the local militias and partisans to harass
and harry the British supply lines.
In 1780 and 1781,
Greene and his other field officers lured the British away
from the coast and into the Carolina Backcountry
where they were soundly defeated
at the Battle of King's Mountain and Cowpens.
As the British were lured further away from the Carolinas
and into Virginia, the Carolinas exploded into a civil war
as patriots fought Loyalists for control of the states.
Greene moved back into the Carolinas to recapture the states
fighting the British in a series of engagements
and forcing them back
to the coastal cities where they started.
In the summer of 1781,
Greene's army was exhausted from the near constant fighting,
as was the British army
under the command of Charles Cornwallis.
Cornwallis knew he could not stay in the South any longer
and marched his army north toward Yorktown, Virginia.
In the North, the combined American
and French forces marched south
to intercept Cornwallis at Yorktown.
Cornwallis found himself surrounded with his back to the sea
and no hope for rescue.
After a month-long siege, he was forced to surrender.
The surrender at Yorktown was the last major military action
of the American Revolution.
Peace Talks opened after the surrender
and took nearly two full years to finalize.
In the end, the Treaty of Paris officially recognized
the United States as a sovereign nation
and was made independent and free from Great Britain.
(uplifting music)
As the American Revolution raged on,
the Continental Congress, having declared independence,
found themselves not only with the necessity
to conduct a war as a sovereign body,
but to unite the now independent states in
a loose confederation government.
On November 15th, 1777, the Congress adopted
the Articles of Confederation,
creating a weak central government
which bound the states together only in times
of great conflict, such as the ongoing revolution.
The articles worked through the war
as they granted the Congress the power to conduct the war
as a united body and deal with foreign nations as such.
After the war, however,
it became apparent that the loose system
of central government was not going to work.
Under the articles,
the state governments had direct control
over their own commerce, economy and loss.
And while many of these overlapped,
not all did, creating chaos and confusion.
The central government could not mediate the issues
between states and disputes over state boundaries,
taxation and international trade began
to push the government to its limit.
The United States was less than a decade old
and was already facing an economic and political disaster.
One of the major indicators that change needed
to be made occurred in fall 1786
when the economic situation began leading
to mass foreclosures and bankruptcies.
In Massachusetts, revolutionary war veteran,
Daniel Shays led a rebellion of some 1,200 other veterans
who had not been paid for their service,
nor had received a pension,
and occupied the Massachusetts Supreme Court in Springfield,
thereby denying the Massachusetts Government the ability
to foreclose on any property.
They attacked the new federal arsenal at Springfield
but were unsuccessful in taking possession of the grounds.
Fighting began to occur all over the state
as the rebellion spread.
Fortunately, the Massachusetts militia defeated the rebels,
scattering them, and putting an end to the fighting.
It was clear the Articles of Confederation limited
the federal government's ability
to handle domestic issues as well as foreign policy issues.
The Treaty of Paris, which had ended the revolution,
made stipulations that debts owed by Americans
to British subjects would still need to be honored
and that loyalists would still be able to bring suits
to United States courts for the return
of their confiscated property.
As each state was liable for ensuring these terms were met,
there were discrepancies across the country,
as some enforced these terms better than others.
The result was British troops still occupying forts
and territory, which now technically belonged
to the United States,
as the terms of the Treaty had not been met.
With no authority to mediate
or command the states to adhere to the treaty,
the federal government could do nothing.
With few options, a convention was called by several states
in order to make amendments to the articles.
In May, 1787,
the constitutional convention convened in Philadelphia
and began debating the Articles of Confederation
and what would be required to alter them.
It was immediately clear that the articles did not work,
but what form of government would?
A fundamentally new design
was proposed and hotly debated.
As would become the hallmark of American politics,
several compromises were met
to achieve the balance the states required
to ratify this new form of government.
This new constitution would form a government of checks
and balances with three distinct branches dividing
the federal authority between them.
The legislative branch
or the Congress would be divided into two houses,
the House of Representatives,
composed of state representatives comparable
to the population of each state, and the Senate,
composed of two representatives from each state.
This branch has the power to create
and vote on laws, enact taxes, declare war,
override presidential vetoes, create federal courts,
except for the Supreme Court,
and sets the number of justices on the Supreme Court.
Independently, the Senate has the power
to confirm presidential appointments to the judiciary,
heads of departments and other federal offices,
ratify treaties with foreign powers,
remove impeached officials from office.
The House of Representatives has the power
to impeach federal officials, including the president.
The executive branch would be led by a president elected
by an electoral college who would be vested with the power
to execute, enforce or veto federal laws,
appoint federal officers,
grant pardons, and act as the primary role
in all matters relating to foreign policy.
As the commander in chief,
it was also the role of the president
to lead the military forces
of the United States at the direction of Congress.
The third branch, the judicial branch,
would consist of a Supreme Court,
appointed by the president
and approved by the Congress.
The Supreme Court is responsible for the interpretation
of the laws passed by Congress
and acts as the final ruling on matters of legality.
In a later Supreme Court case,
Marbury v. Madison, 1803,
the Supreme Court added the determination
of which laws of Congress are unconstitutional.
While this check was not in the original constitution,
it is an essential part of the function of the court,
a government by the people for the people.
It was the first time any nation's constitution
had included the people as instrumental in the establishment
and validity of the government.
The Constitution was drafted in September, 1787,
and distributed to the Congress of the Confederation.
Instead of the amendments to the articles they had expected,
the Constitution offered an entirely new form of government.
Immediate debate began as the Constitution needed
to be ratified and not unanimously by each state
as under the Articles of Confederation,
but rather by a 2/3 majority.
In October, 1787,
the first of 85 pamphlets championing
the Constitution were published and widely distributed.
Known as the Federalist papers,
they were published anonymously at the time.
Although we know now
that its authors were Alexander Hamilton,
James Madison and John Jay.
Quickly, two factions began to form.
On one side were the Federalists,
who supported the Constitution
and a powerful central government.
On the other were the anti-Federalists,
who saw the Constitution as too powerful
and detracted from the power of state governments.
One by one, however, the states ratified the Constitution.
The need for a change in government had become too dire
and most states realized
that this constitution would be the best way forward.
The Constitution was officially ratified
by the states over the course of 1787 to '88.
And on June 21st, 1788,
the ninth State, New Hampshire, voted in favor,
making the Constitution the new law of the land.
(suspenseful music)
George Washington, hero of the American Revolution
was elected in early 1789
to be the first president of the United States.
John Adams, having received the second most votes,
was elected his vice president.
While Washington did not ally himself
with either the Federalist
or anti-Federalists factions which had taken root,
he did favor Federalist policies in order
to strengthen the fledgling government.
He wisely filled his cabinet
with the brightest political minds of the age,
from both Federalist
and anti-Federalists factions, including Thomas Jefferson,
Alexander Hamilton, Henry Knox, and Edmund Randolph.
During his presidency, Washington attempted
to focus on the myriad domestic issues facing the country.
He pushed the Congress
to pass tariffs on imported goods in an effort
to raise revenue for the federal government
and worked closely with his secretary of treasury,
Alexander Hamilton, to pass a series of economic programs
and laws which would create a national bank,
and establish a national debt for the government.
He selected the permanent location for the future capital
of the United States
and would bear the name Washington, District of Columbia,
in honor of the first president.
In times of crisis, Washington took his role
as commander in chief literally.
In 1790, in response to the Distilled Spirits Duties Act
or Whiskey Act, which taxed domestically distilled spirits,
farmers in Western Pennsylvania began an armed insurrection.
They attacked tax collectors
and clashed with federal forces,
prompting Washington to summon the Pennsylvania
and Virginia militias to active duty.
He personally led the troops into Western Pennsylvania
and with a little show of force,
his commissioners were able
to broker the end of what became known
as the Whiskey Rebellion.
In foreign affairs,
Washington suffered from attacks on all sides.
In France, their one-time ally, King Louis Louis XVI,
had lost control of his government and his people,
resulting in an increasingly violent revolution.
Trouble with barbery pirates
in the Mediterranean threatened to disrupt
a fragile American maritime trade.
England had begun the practice of impressment
or the stealing of sailors and ships from other nations,
forcing Washington to demand satisfaction.
Sending his friend
and political confidant, John Jay, to England,
Washington hoped to achieve an amicable trade agreement
and cessation of American impressment.
Jay returned with a treaty in hand
and represented the American Government well
in Washington's eyes, bringing Great Britain
and the United States closer together.
Conversely, the Jay Treaty angered pro-French factions
in his administration and around the country.
Washington was elected for a second term in 1792,
again with Adams as his vice president.
He continued to struggle with the new French Republic,
as in 1793, they executed King Louis XVI
and were engulfed in a series of revolutionary wars.
Washington leaned hard into his desire
for American isolation from Europe,
much to the frustration of the pro-French members
of his cabinet, like Thomas Jefferson.
In 1793, during his second term,
Washington was forced to remove himself
and the government from their temporary capital
in Philadelphia due to an outbreak of yellow fever.
The government moved to Trenton, New Jersey
where the Continental Congress had once briefly met in 1784.
Washington struggled with the growing rift
within his administration.
The anti-Federalists, now the Democratic-Republicans,
had grown further and further apart ideologically
from the Federalists.
Washington feared the creation of two political parties
and warned repeatedly that their existence could lead
to a serious fracture within the government.
The Washington Administration set many precedents
for the United States Government
and the Office of the President.
From pushing domestic policies to foreign intervention
or lack thereof, Washington set the tone for his successors.
His final act as president was to step down.
While Congress had not yet placed any term restrictions
on the Office of the President, it was widely expected
that Washington might just remain president
or establish a kind of dynasty, not unlike a king.
Instead, after two terms served,
Washington stepped down
and did not run for office for a third term.
(ominous music)
His successor, elected by a narrow margin in 1797,
was John Adams whose foreign affairs struggles were equal
or worse to Washington's.
The situation in France devolved further
into a period known as the Reign of Terror.
Adams continued Washington's policy of isolation
and further pushed the United States away from France.
In response, the new revolutionary government
of France began an unofficial war against the United States
or quasi-war.
The fighting was kept primarily at sea
and involved a number of naval battles
with America's fledgling Navy.
At home, Adams became increasingly unpopular
with the Democratic-Republicans
as he passed the Alien and Sedition Acts,
allowing the government to arrest
or silence any critics
of the Adams Administration's actions
in regards to France.
Bedeviled by members of his own party
and members of the opposition,
Adams took it upon himself to broker an agreement
with France and and end his administration in peace.
In his final year in office,
Adams and his wife Abigail
were the first presidential family
to move into the White House in the new capital
in Washington, DC.
They lived and worked out of the building
as it was put together around them.
Adams ran again, hoping that his peace
with France would regain favor,
but lost out to Thomas Jefferson early
in the electoral process.
(ominous music)
The presidency of Thomas Jefferson ushered in 25 years
of Democratic-Republican control of the executive branch.
Jefferson's administration rapidly worked
to undo the damage they felt Washington
and Adams' administrations had done.
Jefferson worked to reduce the accumulated debt,
cutting the budget as low as he possibly could.
He reduced the Army and Navy and removed the whiskey tax
which had plagued Washington's presidency.
Like Washington and Adams,
Jefferson had to contend with piracy in the Mediterranean.
He employed an American naval squadron
to soundly defeat the barbery pirates
and forced them to capitulate.
Unlike his predecessors, Jefferson actively worked
with the new French government,
now under the control of Napoleon Bonaparte.
Bonaparte, looking to make quick cash
and to offload some old colonial holdings,
sold the Louisiana territory
to Jefferson's administration in 1803,
opening an entirely new frontier for Americans.
The following year,
Jefferson employed the Corps of Discovery,
led by Captain Merriweather Lewis
and Lieutenant William Clark
to mount an expedition up the Missouri River
and over the continental divide.
Their goals were to map the new territory
to find a practical route across the western half
of the continent and
to establish an American presence in the West
before Europeans got the chance to claim territory.
Aided by a Shoshone woman named Sacagawea who served
as an interpreter, the party made contact
with over 70 Indian tribes,
produced 140 maps and documented more than 200 new plant
and animal species.
Jefferson's second term was marred
by the Napoleonic Wars raging in Europe.
Both British and French Navies
now actively attacked American ships and sailors,
resulting in violations
of America's neutral shipping rights.
In response, Jefferson employed an embargo
on American shipping.
It was wildly unpopular
and even more wildly unsuccessful,
damaging Jefferson's attempts to balance the budget
before his second term was up.
(inspirational music)
Despite the unpopularity the Democratic-Republicans faced
at the end of Jefferson's administration, his protege,
James Madison was elected
as the fourth president of the United States.
Madison, who had been instrumental
during the Constitutional Convention,
inherited a complicated and messy relationship
with England and France,
and mounting tension within the United States.
Madison continued Jefferson's embargo
for the first two years of his presidency,
realizing that trade was necessary for the betterment
of the United States, and at the behest of Congress,
Madison reopened American shipping to France and England,
asking them once again to honor America's neutrality.
Naturally, the capturing of ships
and impressment of sailors began again,
almost immediately, a group of young congressmen,
namely two gentlemen named Henry Clay
and John C. Calhoun, hounded the president
for a stronger show of force.
Known as War Hawks,
Clay, Calhoun, and their faction demanded Madison
to take a more militant stance toward Britain and France.
Increased tension on the American interior added
to the fire.
British agents had been suspected of arming
and supplying a native uprising on the frontier
and British troops still held forts
which belonged to the United States.
After British ships blatantly attacked American sailors
immediately off of the American coast,
Madison gave in to the War Hawks
and asked the Congress to declare war on June 1st, 1812.
The American people may have been ready
for war with Britain,
but its army and navy were not.
In three separate invasions of Canada,
the United States was defeated
and beaten back with two out
of three armies forced to surrender.
Although not without some success.
One of the invasions had resulted in the burning
of the City of York, the provincial capital in Canada.
Naval battles fared much better.
In one instance, the USS Constitution
and the HMS Guerriere faced off
in a swift naval engagement lasting less than an hour.
The British were horrified to find
that their cannon balls bounced harmlessly off
of the Constitution's 22-inch hole.
The USS Constitution would go on to wreak havoc
among the British Navy throughout the war.
Many native tribes a banded together under the leadership
of the Shawnee Chief Tecumseh and his brother Tenskwatawa
or Lalawethika, known as the Prophet.
Tecumseh's confederacy of tribes sided
with the British in the last desperate gamble
to establish control
over the continued American expansion west.
The British and Tecumseh's confederacy kept
the American military at bay in Canada
where Tecumseh was ultimately killed
at the Battle of the Thames in 1813.
Tecumseh's death fractured the confederacy of tribes
and ultimately drew them out of the war.
The British on the other hand turned on the offensive
and attacked American positions along the Chesapeake,
aiming to capture the United States capital, Washington DC.
In August, 1814,
the British successfully sailed up the Patuxent River,
south of Washington,
and landed troops who marched toward the US Capital City.
A disastrous defense
of the city at Bladensburg left Washington, DC open
to attack and occupation.
In the White House, Madison was forced to evacuate
and watched the disaster from afar.
His wife, Dolly Madison,
realized that if the British captured the city,
they would wreak havoc
and likely set fire to the various government buildings.
Mrs. Madison had her enslaved servant,
Paul Jennings, take down and secure the famous copy
of the Landsdowne portrait of George Washington,
which hung prominently in the White House.
Dolly's precaution proved prophetic,
as when the British troops occupied Washington,
they did indeed set numerous government buildings ablaze,
including the still under construction US Capitol,
the Treasury, the Department of War, and White House.
As the city burned, a well-timed hurricane,
rushed up the coast, putting out the fires,
and in one recorded case,
picked up two cannons and threw them several yards away,
killing both British soldiers and American civilians.
While the British had successfully taken
and burned the US Capitol,
they were forced to abandon the city,
as controlling it would not be possible
without additional reinforcement,
and the hurricane had severely damaged their fleet
on the Patuxent River.
Madison returned to the ruined Capitol
and continued to prosecute the war.
The following month, British Naval efforts
to capture the City of Baltimore were thwarted at the siege
of Fort McHenry where British vessels bombarded the fort
through a vicious battle which lasted into the night.
In the morning at reve,
Fort McHenry ran up its oversized Star-Spangled Banner flag
as it prepared for another day of fighting.
Instead, the British fleet sailed back out to sea,
unwilling to engage more American positions,
and began diverting the resources
for an attack on New Orleans in Louisiana.
The siege of Fort McHenry and the site
of the oversized American flag
on the morning of September 14th, 1814
inspired American lawyer, Francis Scott Key to pen
a poem titled "The Defense of Fort McHenry."
The words of the poem,
set to the tune of an old British drinking song,
would go on to become the national anthem
of the United States, "The Star-Spangled Banner."
The British made one last attempt
to make an offensive effort into the American mainland near
the city of New Orleans in Louisiana.
Hoping to get control of the Mississippi River,
British forces landed several miles south of New Orleans
and attempted to march on the city.
The defense of the city was organized
by a fiery commander named Andrew Jackson,
whose hodgepodge assembly
of defenders included pirates, militia,
free Blacks and regulars.
In January, 1815, unaware that the United States
and England had concluded negotiations for a peace treaty
in December, 1814, British forces marched on New Orleans
and engaged in one last battle.
Jackson's ragtag defenders held off several waves
of British troops and won an incredible-
if somewhat belated- victory for the United States.
Although the war of 1812 is little known today,
it had many lasting impacts across for the United States
and the people of North America.
Without question, the greatest effect on the war
was not any territory gained,
but rather the definitive end of any hope
for the Native Americans to establish any kind
of sovereignty over their land.
As part of the treaty,
the British had pushed for the establishment
of an Indian state in the Great Lakes region,
but the United States had outright rejected the plan.
The dam was about to burst for Western expansion
and there was nothing and no one left
to stop the tide from sweeping away
the Native tribes still standing.
On a global scale, most of the European powers
had assumed the United States would not be able to last.
The great experiment would've run its course
in these backwards farmers and high-hatted intellectuals
would've torn the country apart.
Instead, on a very public world stage,
the United States had again declared war
on the most powerful empire in the world
and fought them to a standstill.
While there was very little territory gained
by the Treaty of Ghent,
the statement was clear, the United States was here
and they were here to stay,
at least as long as it could stay together.
(uplifting music)
As the 19th century progressed,
many Americans became enamored with the concept
of continentalism, a belief that the United States
would one day stretch from sea
to shining sea and cover the North American continent.
The Treaty of Ghent did very little
to enhance the territory owned
by the United States in the aftermath of the war of 1812,
although Jefferson's Louisiana Purchase
had increased the territory owned by the United States,
all the way to the Rocky Mountains.
Political treaties with Spain
and Great Britain helped to expand
and clarify these borders through the 1820s
and Americans became increasingly ravenous
to fulfill this continental dream.
At the same time, President James Monroe's 1823
warned European powers that the Western Hemisphere
was no longer theirs to play with
and that the United States would exert its influence
as the major power in the region
if they attempted to colonize here again.
The message was clear
and an idea began to take shape in the minds
of the American people:
this land is not for the Europeans and it never was.
It is destined for the people of the United States.
The term manifest destiny first appeared during the 1840s
during growing conflict over control
of the Oregon territory,
but has come to encompass the entire era
of westward expansion for the United States,
believing that the were unquestionably destined
to inhabit the entire continent
and looking for a chance to redeem what some believed
was ungodly and sinful.
West, Americans looked to spread their values
and their economy beyond the Mississippi River
and reform the West into an evangelical version
of the agrarian East.
In their way stood the proud remnants
of Native American tribes of the East
and the tribes of the West now unwilling
to give any more ground without a fight.
Additionally, the few European colonies still standing
in North America, namely Great Britain and Spain,
as well as by 1824,
a newly independent Mexico would not simply roll over
and allow the United States to expand unchecked.
When he purchased the Louisiana Territory,
President Jefferson wanted
to establish lasting diplomatic relationships
with the myriad of tribes in the West,
and as became the custom through the 19th century,
hoped to civilize and assimilate the tribes
into American society.
It did not take long, however,
for plans to assimilate the Native Americans becoming plans
to remove and relocate them,
especially in the aftermath of the war of 1812.
As early as 1824, under the presidency of James Monroe,
plans were drafted for the creation of Indian territories,
which would force the Cherokee Indians
to abandon their ancestral land east
of the Mississippi River and move west.
In 1829, President Andrew Jackson,
the hero of the war of 1812,
made those plans a reality,
convincing the Congress
to pass the Indian Removal Act In 1830.
The act forced the five civilized tribes,
the Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, Seminole,
and Cherokee to abandon their lands and move west.
It was an act of forced displacement
with more than 60,000 people removed from their homes
and relocated beyond the Mississippi River.
The removal saw a few minor conflicts,
but ultimately the tribes were coerced into leaving.
Known one as the Trail of Tears,
the routes taken by these tribes were difficult
and resulted in the deaths of around 15,000 Natives.
(suspenseful music)
Pioneers made the journey westward to farm, mine and ranch,
often finding the land inhospitable and dangerous.
During their journeys, they faced skirmishes
with Native Americans, diseases such as cholera
and typhoid fever, punishing winters without food
and other hardships.
About 70,000 members
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
emigrated to the Salt Lake Valley
from their homes in Illinois,
beginning in 1847, known as the Mormon Exodus.
Hundreds of thousands of emigrators used the Oregon Trail,
a 2,000 mile route from Independence, Missouri
to Oregon City, Oregon.
Land speculators would sell cheap plots
with promises of unbounded opportunity,
inspiring thousands to make the journey.
In the winter of 1846 to '47,
members of the infamous Donner party were traveling
by wagon train west on the Oregon trail,
but became snowbound in the Sierra Nevada mountains.
The party members were forced to resort
to cannibalism to survive.
The overland journey was so risky
and difficult that some westward immigrants opted
for the six-month route by sea
around Cape Horn at the tip of South America instead.
In 1848, gold was discovered in the foothills
of the Sierra Nevada mountains in California,
which had the same year become part of the US
as a consequence of the Mexican-American War.
Once word got out about the gold,
men from near and far sought their fortunes
in the Sierra Nevada foothills
in what became known as the Gold Rush.
In 1849, San Francisco's population skyrocketed
from 812 to 20,000 people
with those prospectors arriving
that year becoming known collectively as the Forty-Niners.
The prices for land, goods and services skyrocketed.
People stood to make more money selling those goods
and services to prospectors then
from actually mining for gold.
Because men outnumbered women in these towns greatly,
traditional women's work like washing clothes
and cooking became highly in demand
and therefore highly profitable.
Nevertheless, actual gold was certainly found.
The rush produced on average 76 tons of gold per year,
and by the end of the 1850s,
it was estimated that $550 million worth
of gold had been mined,
worth about $187 billion in today's dollars.
The thousands who had moved West needed fast mail service
for letters and news from the East.
While several male carriers
over the Rocky Mountains existed,
the most famous was the Pony Express.
Founded in 1860, the service used relays
of horse mounted riders riding at breakneck speed day
and night to carry mail between Missouri
and California, which it could do in about 10 days.
It only operated for 18 months
before the first transcontinental telegraph
was established in 1861,
but it was vital for connecting the new state of California
with the rest of the US.
As Americans began to settle west,
more conflicts with the existing Native American tribes led
to further violence, and the United States military
became nearly permanently quartered
in various forts across the Midwest
and along the West Coast.
The Texas territory in the American Southwest
had been ceded to Spain in the 1810s,
but following the Mexican War of Independence in 1821
and the official formation of the Mexican Republic
just three years later, the territory became part of Mexico.
Texas was far away from the center
of the Mexican Government in Saltillo
and had fewer than 4,000 people living
across the vast territory.
Looking to increase immigration to the state
and hoping the subsequent rise
in population would deter Indian raids,
the Mexican Government offered cheap land
and considerable financial benefits for those
who would take residence in the state.
Many of those who immigrated came from the American South
and brought with them the culture
and mentality of the region, including slavery.
In 1829, Mexico abolished slavery
and after the Anglo citizens nearly revolted,
the Mexican president also banned any further immigration
to Texas by citizens of the United States.
In Texas, the Anglo citizens ignored the laws
and rapidly began to outnumber the Mexican-born population
in the state.
When in 1834,
Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna led a successful coup
of the Mexican Government,
the Texans were initially pleased
as Santa Anna quickly undid many of the acts
and laws of his predecessors.
However, Santa Anna went much further
and disbanded the political bodies of each
of the Mexican states, imposing a dictatorship
over the country.
In 1835, with support from both the Anglos
and Tejanos populations, the Texans rebelled,
looking to secure independence from Mexico.
In late February, 1836,
The most famous battle of the Texas Revolution began
with the siege of the Alamo Mission.
Defended by fewer than 300 Texans,
the walls of the Mission had been turned
into a makeshift fort.
Its defenders included Colonel William Travis, James Bowie,
and former US congressman and folk legend, Davy Crockett.
The Texans were surrounded on all sides
and besieged for 13 days by Santa Anna's army
before the final night attack on March 6th, 1836.
The battle was brutal
and Santa Anna ordered for there to be no prisoners taken.
The handful of prisoners who managed
to survive the massacre were executed as well.
The battle of the Alamo became a rallying cry
for the Texans still fighting and fueled the Texas army
in the weeks which followed.
A little more than a month later,
the Texas Revolution ended in victory
for the people of Texas after the Battle of San Jacinto
in April, 1836.
The Texas Revolution lasted less than a year
and saw the creation of the Republic of Texas.
Naturally, the predominantly American population
immediately began petitioning the government
of the United States
to annex the new republic and add it to the growing union.
Despite fierce arguments over the admittance
of what would undeniably be another slave state
into the Union, it took less than a decade
before Texas was annexed by the United States.
The annexation of Texas sparked yet another conflict
with Mexico in 1846.
Because the borders of the Republic of Texas were undefined
and disputed by Mexico,
when the United States annexed Texas,
Mexico claimed that the United States
was taking Mexican land.
President James K. Polk attempted to negotiate
with the Mexican Government,
offering to pay for the disputed territory
in addition to the California,
New Mexico and Arizona territories.
However, the Mexican Government refused.
In response, Polk sent troops
to occupy the disputed territory,
causing Mexican forces to attack the small American force.
Polk used the affair to convince Congress
to declare war on Mexico.
Mexico's army was equipped
with surplus flintlock firearms from the Napoleonic era,
while the United States was armed
with far more modern weaponry.
Disorganized, under-supplied,
and facing internal political strife
at every level of management,
the Mexican forces were little to no match
for the American Army and Navy,
who made quick work conquering vast sections
of Mexico and its territories.
When the Mexican Government finally collapsed,
they were forced to surrender large swaths of territory
to the United States, including California and New Mexico,
in addition to suffering the indignity of having
to recognize the sovereignty of the Republic of Texas
and its subsequent annexation in 1845.
Lasting from April, 1846, to February, 1848,
the Mexican-American War proved to be a one-sided one
and clearly displayed America's ambitions to secure control
of the North American continent.
There were many dissidents to the concept
of manifest destiny, especially within the Whig party,
the successors of the Federalists,
including, by the mid 19th century,
a young Illinois politician named Abraham Lincoln.
In 1844, Manifest Destiny took center stage
as territorial disputes with Great Britain over Oregon
and the ongoing tensions with Mexico
over the Texas territory split political parties further.
As Western territories grew in population
and were being considered for admission to the Union,
whether these areas would allow
or ban slavery became a crucial question.
The fragile balance of power in Congress
between slave states and free states was at risk.
(tense music)
Since the first African slaves arrived in Virginia in 1619,
the institution of slavery had grown more
and more ingrained in the culture
and economy of the United States, particularly in the South.
While the United States government had abolished
the slave trade in 1808,
it had introduced a form
of chattel slavery within its borders,
ensuring generations of African-Americans remained working.
While there had been a few slave rebellions
across the United States in the early 19th century,
including Nat Turner's 1831 Rebellion,
none had succeeded.
Through the early 19th century,
some slaves attempted to escape and fled north,
hoping to find sanctuary in the pro-abolition states
of the Northeast, or in Canada.
They traveled north on a series of secret routes
to known abolitionist locations and safe houses.
Known as the Underground Railroad,
the pathway north was dangerous
and those brave enough to flee bondage were aided
by fellow escaped slaves, freed men and women,
and anti-slavery sympathizers.
One such individual was Harriet Tubman.
Tubman had escaped slavery herself in 1849
and spent many years
after aiding more than 70 slaves escaping slavery
in the South.
As the issue of slavery pressed closer
and closer to a breaking point,
so too the did the tension within the federal government.
In 1854, South Carolina Congressman Preston Brooks
caned Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner on the floor
of the Senate.
Pro-slavery sympathizers from around the country
sent Brooks new canes congratulating him.
Abolitionists saw the public attack as the embodiment
of the control the South seemed to have over the country.
Could they simply do whatever they wanted and expect nothing
but compromise in return?
The polarization of the country was made perfectly clear
as a result of the incident.
It had taken years of agreements
and compromises to come to this stalemate.
In 1820, the Missouri Compromise declared
that Missouri would be a new slave state
and Maine is a new free state,
and that slavery would be prohibited north
of the southern boundary of Missouri
in the rest of the Louisiana Purchase.
The fragile balance was preserved.
Texas joined in 1844 as a slave state,
and Oregon was admitted in 1846 as a free state.
When the US won more than one million square miles
of territory from Mexico
as a result of the Mexican-American War in 1848,
volatile debate occurred over whether the new territories
would allow slavery.
The US gained all of present day, California, Texas,
Colorado, Arizona, New Mexico, Nevada, and Utah
as a result of that fight.
The resulting agreements said
that California would be a free state and the slave trade,
but not slavery would be abolished in Washington, DC.
But a new fugitive slave act would enable Southerners
to reclaim runaway slaves
who had escaped across borders to free states.
The agreement allowed the rest of the areas to determine
for themselves whether to to allow slavery.
In 1854, two new states,
Kansas and Nebraska were set
to be established in the Louisiana Purchase area,
but Southern legislators objected
because according to the terms of the Missouri Compromise,
both states would be free.
A new compromise called for popular sovereignty
or once again, allowing the settlers of the territories
to determine the question for themselves.
The battle for Kansas
and Nebraska came to embody the soul of the nation.
People flooded to the territories
and tried to influence the vote,
many of them voting illegally.
Soon Kansas spiraled into civil war,
a conflict that killed hundreds
and which became known as Bleeding Kansas.
Among those who had joined in the violence was one
of the most notorious freedom fighters
in American history, John Brown.
Brown was a radical preacher
and a staunch abolitionist.
He had, on multiple occasions,
attempted to incite an armed slave rebellion,
and in Kansas, ramped up the violence to such an extent
that he and his followers hacked five Kansan slave owners
to death with broadswords.
Brown then began planning a raid on Harpers Ferry
in Virginia, hoping to once again inspire
the enslaved peoples of the South
to rise up against their oppressors.
He planned on capturing the armory
and arsenal in Harpers Ferry in addition
to the rifle factory in order to arm his rebellion.
Brown's raid commenced in October, 1859,
and was swiftly put down by the United States Army.
The US forces, led by a young colonel named Robert E. Lee,
quickly surrounded the engine house Brown's men had occupied
and after Brown refused to surrender,
took the building by force.
Brown was tried and executed for treason
by the State of Virginia, and in so doing,
became a martyr for anti-slave forces around the country.
Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry was
a defining moment for the country.
It seemed now inevitable
that there would be some great conflict
to decide the fate of the nation.
The election of 1860 was the final straw for the South.
Republican presidential candidate, Abraham Lincoln,
ran on a platform of liberal policies,
which included raising tariffs,
infrastructure improvements, and expanding the railroads.
While Lincoln was an abolitionist
and vehemently opposed slavery,
he understood that the issue
would inevitably tear the country apart
and had initially promised to do everything in his power
to keep the South from breaking away from the Union.
Lincoln's election to the presidency,
however, was enough for some Southern States
to make the break.
In December, 1860, South Carolina led the charge
and seceded from the United States.
Other Southern States quickly followed
and sitting President James Buchanan faced
a growing disaster.
As Southern States seceded,
they began to confiscate federal forts
and arsenals which belonged to the United States Military.
One such location was Fort Sumter in South Carolina.
President Buchanan had been unwilling
to resupply the garrison,
and when Lincoln took office,
he faced a near impossible decision.
Lincoln, unwilling to surrender an American fort
to the rebels or recognized their authority,
sent a letter to the governor of South Carolina,
informing him that a ship carrying food,
but no ammunition would attempt to resupply the fort.
This allowed Lincoln in the satisfaction of knowing
that if the South fired on the fort,
they would be the aggressor in any conflict,
and if they did not, he would've made strides
in negotiating with the rebels, as well as holding the fort.
It was not to be.
On the 9th of April,
Confederate President Jefferson Davis
ordered General P.T.G. Beauregard
to take the fort before the supplies would arrive.
(suspenseful music)
On April 12th, 1861,
the standoff finally erupted when Beauregard
at last opened fire on Fort Sumter.
The bombardment lasted 34 hours
with more than 4,000 shells fired.
Despite the ferocity of the bombardment,
not a single union soldier was killed during the action.
At 2:30 PM on April 13th, 1861,
they surrendered the fort under agreeable terms
and marched from the fort carrying the flag
which had endured the battle.
For Lincoln, the loss of Fort Sumter was
a kind of symbolic victory.
While losing the fort was not ideal,
the public in the North rallied behind him and the Union.
States like New Jersey and Delaware which had been,
for a time, on the fence regarding secession,
threw their support wholeheartedly toward the Union.
Lincoln used the momentum carried by the battle to call
for 75,000 volunteers
willing to help restore order in the South
and return these secessionist states to the Union.
The North answered the call,
and in days, the rinks were beginning to fill.
In Ohio, so many men volunteered
that they could have met the full 75,000 volunteers
on their own.
In the South, the victory at Fort Sumter did less
to inspire a call to arms
than did Lincoln's call for volunteers.
The call for 75,000 volunteers triggered the secession
of four additional states, Virginia, Tennessee, Arkansas,
and North Carolina.
To the South, it was clear that Lincoln planned
to use the federal government
to coerce them back into the Union by blood.
In the North, it was clear that the South
had violated the Constitution
by seceding and it was within the power
of the federal government to take back the states.
Again, the question of the power
of the government created great consternation
and powerful opinions from both sides.
Amidst it all remained the question at the heart
of the war, slavery.
It was clear now to the leaders of the rebellion
that if Lincoln had the power to raise an army of volunteers
to return the states to the Union,
he could use that power
to end slavery in the United States for good.
If the Confederacy did not achieve victory early on,
there was no chance of success for them in the long run.
A protracted and costly war may wear
down the North eventually,
but the South did not have the means
to conduct such a conflict,
nor would they survive if they did.
General Winfield Scott, the veteran of the war of 1812,
and the Mexican-American War,
was given command of Union forces at the onset of the war.
Scott was an excellent tactician,
although his experience on the battlefield was outdated,
he implemented a full-scale naval blockade of the South,
known as the Anaconda Plan,
which he hoped would help hasten the end of the war
by choking the South
of the many resources it would need to run the war.
However, goods were still making their way
into the South through Texas.
The Union had a clear view
of their strategic goals from this point forward.
In the East, defeat the Confederate Army in the field,
capture major coastal cities along the East Coast,
and capture the new confederate capital
in Richmond, Virginia.
In the West, capture major cities and forts
along the Mississippi River and cut off Texas
from the rest of the South.
For the South, the path to success was on the battlefield.
There was no way in which the South could match the North
in terms of industry, manpower, or naval power.
Aid could come in the form of help from Europe,
but France and England had abolished slavery decades prior
and would never meaningfully commit
to the South during the conflict.
This meant that the Confederates needed swift
and decisive victories against the Union,
possibly on Northern soil.
If the cost of war was too high,
the peace Democrats and more moderate Republicans
in Congress might pull the Union out of the war.
In the Eastern theater of the war,
early Confederate successes kept the rebellion alive
as a revolving door of Union high commanders continued
to plague the federal forces.
Confederate General Robert E. Lee, who had declined command
of Union forces at the war's outbreak in favor
of supporting his home state of Virginia,
emerged as the tactical
and logistical genius behind the survival
of the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia.
Lee kept the cause of the Confederacy alive
as long as his army was
in the field and responded effectively
and swiftly to the often cumbersome
and uncertain Union forces he opposed.
In the West, Union General Ulysses S. Grant emerged
as the best chance for the North's success.
Grant waged a series
of incredible campaigns against his opponents in the West
and managed to take control of the Mississippi River,
putting a wedge between Texas
and the other Southern States.
Grant's greatest victory in the West came with the siege
of Vicksburg ending in July, 1863.
At the same time, General Lee had invaded Pennsylvania
in the East with the intention of breaking the spirit
of the North and forcing Lincoln to surrender.
Instead, he was soundly defeated at the Battle of Gettysburg
by Union General George Meade.
Between Lee's defeated Gettysburg
and Grants victory at Vicksburg,
the high tide of the Confederacy was over.
In 1862, after the Battle of Antietam,
Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation,
claiming that slavery was abolished within those parts
of the country, which had rebelled against the Union
and allowed the Union Army
to take on any slaves found in the South
and bring them north.
Lincoln in the War Department authorized the raising
of Black troops,
known as Colored Troops during the Civil War.
While the war had to begun for Lincoln
as a means to reunite the country, as it progressed,
he struck at the heart of the conflict
and shifted the war goals beyond simply
a return to the status quo.
Lincoln believed slavery could not
and would no longer exist within the borders
of the United States
and organized his party to begin working on amendments
to the Constitution to make it so.
Grant was given command of the entire Union Army
and was moved to command the Eastern Theater of the war.
He left General William Tecumseh Sherman
in command of the Western Theater,
and the two began to prosecute total war against the South.
Grant threw his army repeatedly at Lee,
forcing engagement after engagement.
While Lee did win several battles,
they were battles he could not afford to fight.
And even when Grand lost, he moved swiftly,
unlike his predecessors,
and immediately got back into the fray.
In the West, Sherman moved south,
cutting through the South toward Atlanta, Georgia,
leaving a path of devastation in his wake.
Atlanta was burned as Confederate forces fled
before Sherman's army,
unable to stop the Union juggernaut.
Sherman marched his armies to Savannah by Christmas of 1864
and presented the captured city
to President Lincoln as a gift.
In spring 1865, Lee was finally defeated
for the last time at Appomattox Court House
and surrendered to Grant on April 9th, 1865.
Sherman continued to chase the Confederate forces
in the Carolinas North
until they too surrendered shortly thereafter.
After four years and 600,000 lives lost,
the Civil War was at last over.
Before it had ended,
Lincoln had successfully managed to convince Congress
to pass the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution
in January, 1865, officially abolishing slavery
in the United States.
Lincoln advocated for peace
and hoped that the reconstruction period
that would inevitably follow would be guided, not by malice,
but by a sense of unity.
The country was optimistic
that Lincoln would be the one to lead them.
It was not to be.
Abraham Lincoln, the 16th president of the United States,
was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth,
a radical Southern supporter,
and died on the morning of April 15th, 1865.
Booth was hunted down
and killed during the manhunt,
while his co-conspirators were rounded up
ad executed for treason.
The country mourned the loss of their leader
and the fate of reconstruction was left in the hands
of Lincoln's Vice President Andrew Johnson.
Reconstruction began immediately
after the end of the Civil War
and the South was separated into five military districts.
These districts were occupied by US troops
in order to help reestablish law
and order in the region as well
as enforce the new laws of reconstruction.
Over the course of five years,
the Congress successfully passed
an additional two constitutional amendments
to secure the rights
of the now free Black citizens of the United States.
The first, the Fourteenth Amendment,
granted the right of citizenship to all those born
within the United States,
and granted those citizens the right
of equal protection under the law.
The second, the Fifteenth Amendment,
guaranteed citizens the right to vote, regardless of race,
color, or previous condition of servitude.
The resentment of many individuals in both North
and South grew as the US Government expanded the rights
and liberties of Black Americans to match those
of white Americans.
Especially in regions deeply affected
by the Civil War in the South,
groups of white supremacists rose up
and formed several hate organizations such
as the Ku Klux Klan,
or the KKK, which targeted Black Americans
and other individuals who favored reconstruction.
In 1868, Ulysses S. Grant,
hero of the Civil War, was elected the 18th president
of the United States and took office in March, 1869.
Grant committed much of his early years as president
to Lincoln's original goals of reconstruction,
signing numerous acts ensuring naturalization
and equal rights of Black citizens.
To enforce these acts
and the new constitutional amendments,
he created the Justice Department
and wielded the US Military to stamp out the KKK
and other white supremacist organizations.
Sadly, Grant's presidency was wrought
with political turmoil from both
within his own party and without.
The newly reformed governments
of these Southern States lashed out
at the reconstruction laws
and continuously caused issues during elections.
Grant found his hands tied as his second term came
to an end and the country began its return
to stalemate and compromise as the economic
and business interests of both parties began
to usurp the social crises of reconstruction.
(suspenseful music)
With the end of the American Civil War
and the question of slavery at last resolved,
many people within the United States continued
the exodus out West in the footsteps
of the early 19th century pioneers.
With the territories along
the West Coast fairly well established
and a growing number of cities dotting the Midwest,
moving away from the chaos of the East Coast
and the memory of the war was appealing.
Access to the West had only grown over the course
of the mid 19th century with the introduction
of the transcontinental railroad.
From 1863 to 1869,
a transcontinental railroad was built to connect the Eastern
and Western coasts of the US.
The very first steam train had debuted in 1830,
and by 1850, more than 9,000 miles of track had been laid.
In 1860, it was decided that the mountain pass
where the Donner Party had been trapped was an ideal place
for a railroad to cut through
the Sierra Nevada mountains.
When President Abraham Lincoln signed
the Pacific Railroad Act into law
in 1862, construction commenced.
Though railroad workers suffered attacks
from members of the Sioux, Arapaho,
and Cheyenne tribes as they progressed across the land.
Wherever the railroad went,
ramshackle settlements of the sort immortalized
and Wild West culture were soon to follow.
These places were hotbeds for drinking, gambling,
prostitution, and violence.
When construction of the transcontinental railroad finished
at Promontory Summit, north of the Great Salt Lake in Utah,
a final spike made
of 17.6 karat gold was ceremoniously driven into the ground
before a crowd of workers and dignitaries.
With the railroad's completion,
the travel time for making the 3,000 mile journey
across the United States was cut from months
to under a week.
This made the economic export of Western resources
to Eastern markets easier
and increased the speed of westward expansion.
As settlers entered newly accessible territories,
conflicts with Native Americans increased.
During this time, the exploits,
both real and exaggerated,
of notorious outlaws gained perpetrators infamy at the time
and an enduring legacy today.
Wyatt Earp, former Marshall of Dodge City, Kansas,
moved to Tombstone, Arizona territory in 1879
with several of his brothers in search
of riches from this silver boom.
While there, the Earps ran into a gang
of outlaws called The Cowboys, led by Ike Clanton.
The Earps all had law enforcement backgrounds
with Virgil Earp acting as both town marshal for Tombstone
and as a deputy US marshal.
They teamed up with the temporary policeman, Doc Holiday.
The lawman had a longstanding feud with the Clanton gang.
But things came to a head when Virgil made the decision
to enforce a city ordinance,
prohibiting carrying weapons in town,
which meant disarming the gun-toting Cowboys.
This intervention led to the shootout at the O.K. Corral,
a 30-second gunfight that nevertheless became symbolic
of the Old West, a time when the frontier
was virtually lawless as a consequence
of lawman being spread incredibly thin
over vast territories.
(ominous music)
The beginning of the Gilded Age,
a period characterized as much by wealth and abundance
as by poverty and corruption was in fact a notable ending.
The year 1877 marked the end of reconstruction
and therefore an end to one of the greatest periods
of civil rights reform in the country's history.
Efforts by the federal government
to help protect the rights given to African Americans
after the end of the Civil War were abandoned
as a result of a compromise struck
to settle the contested 1876 election
between Rutherford B. Hayes and Samuel Tilden.
Hayes, a North Republican, was granted the presidency
and reconstruction was ended.
Federal troops were withdrawn from the South,
no longer interfering to protect African American civil
and political rights.
The systemic violence, disenfranchisement,
and oppression that followed would persist
for more than a century and come to be called Jim Crow,
as the federal government gave up on its promise
to give free Black men the rights of citizens in the South.
Sharecropping and low-wage work, such as domestic servitude
were some of the only options available
to freed people in the South.
But depending on who you were, what you looked like,
and where in the country you were,
economic opportunity could abound in Gilded Age America.
Cheap land and relatively high wages compared
to other parts of the world drew
in immigrants by the millions.
Between 1877 and 1900,
approximately 7.3 million people immigrated
into the United States.
Prior to 1880, most came from Western Europe and China,
but closer to the turn of the century,
more immigrants came from Southern and Eastern Europe.
They settled in every area
of the country in large numbers except
for the economically devastated South.
But their appearance triggered political
and social backlash from Americans
who felt their white Protestant country
was being threatened.
Movements to resist certain types of immigrants,
including Catholics, Jews, and Chinese gained momentum.
In the West, sentiments against Chinese workers
were particularly hostile
and mobs were known to gather
and attack Chinese people living in areas
of Wyoming and Washington, driving them out.
Congress restricted Chinese immigration
to the US, beginning in 1892,
continuing to uphold the policy
until a permanent exclusion policy was enacted in 1902.
Fear of minority groups festered among white Americans
after the reconstruction period
and was only further fueled by the influx
of immigration, leading to anti-democratic efforts
to restrict certain groups from voting.
As immigrants flooded into the country,
many of them went west.
As a result of the Homestead and Railroad Acts of 1862,
the federal government had handed most of the lands owned
by the Native Americans over to railroad corporations
and white farmers, including immigrants.
The Homestead Act did not require American citizenship
and the railroads sold land grants at low prices.
Even going so far as to advertise in Europe.
Advances in technology such
as improved plow designs,
meant just one family could officially farm
a large area of land without need
for intensive effort, or hired labor.
But not all farmers were happy.
Increasingly political movements like populism were drawing
in hard-pressed wheat farmers of the Midwest
and resentful white cotton farmers in the South
who were fed up with wealthy elites,
monopolistic corporate interests, and gold.
Nevertheless, farming became so efficient
that the country was producing more food
than it could consume, so the excess was exported.
This was all made possible by the expansion of railroads
that had occurred in the 1850s and '60s,
for they made previously inaccessible land
much more feasible and profitable to work.
Between 1865 and 1898,
America's output of wheat increased by 256%,
corn by 222%,
coal by 800%,
and the miles of railway track by 567%.
The nation's economy revolved around the railroads,
which trucked commodities like wheat, cattle, silver,
and timber from place to place.
The first transcontinental railroad opened in 1869
and railroads were a rapidly expanding area
of the new economy.
By 1890, nearly 800,000 people worked for a railroad.
However, railway work was poorly paid
and often dangerous.
Even as wages were rising and quality of living
for skilled workers in America was outpacing that
for those in England,
mechanization was steadily replacing those skilled workers
with unskilled ones who could be paid less.
The distribution of wealth in the Gilded Age America
was highly unequal
with the top 10% owning more
than 3/4 of the nation's wealth.
This disparity, along with the poor working conditions
that affected the everyday lives of wage workers
inspired a number of vicious worker strikes.
The Great Railroad Strike of 1877 lasted 52 days
before it had to be put down by federal troops
and the National Guard,
but only after the fighting had resulted in over 100 deaths
and workers having burned several railroad cars and engines.
Another big railroad strike occurred in 1886 involving more
than 200,000 labor union workers.
On May 4th, 1886, a gathering at Haymarket Square in Chicago
to protest police brutality against striking workers turned
into a riot when someone threw
a bomb at police officers trying to disperse the crowd.
In the ensuing chaos, seven police officers
and one protestor died.
Searching for those responsible,
police in Chicago and elsewhere rounded up radicals,
labor organizers and anti-capitalist,
selecting eight men who were tried
and convicted for the events at Haymarket Square.
Though some found the trial's evidence to be weak
and saw the convicted men,
most of whom were given the death sentence as martyrs.
For many others, the takeaway from this event
was heightened anti-labor sentiment.
Nevertheless, efforts to improve labor rights continued.
In the Pullman Strike of 1894, widespread striking
and boycotting severely disrupted rail traffic
in the Midwest.
The strike occurred in response to pay cuts
that the Pullman Palace Railroad Car Company made
to its workers' already low wages.
The company did not, however, correspondingly reduce rents
and other costs in its company's town
of Pullman, Illinois near Chicago where the majority
of its workers lived in company housing.
Workers and their families were starving,
but the company's president refused to make any changes
and ordered those that complained to be fired.
The workers decided to strike.
Some of the workers belonged to the American Railway Union
and union delegates found a way to support the strike.
ARU members across the country
would boycott the Pullman Company,
refusing to hitch Pullman-made cars to trains
and unhitching any Pullman cars already attached.
The strategy masterminded by ARU president
and future US Presidential Candidate Eugene V. Debs
soon had 125,000 workers on 29 railroads
quitting work rather than handle Pullman cars.
Some estimates say the number was closer
to 250,000 workers across 27 states.
Though the strike was successfully holding up trains,
workers were still angry,
and in addition, they set fire to engines
and engaged in various riots.
President Grover Cleveland sent federal troops to Chicago
to quell the violence and obtain the court injunction,
which said the ARU could no longer communicate
with any of its members,
nor do anything to stop its members from working.
Violence erupted between these striking workers
and the federal troops,
culminating July 6th, 1874
when more than 6,000 rioters destroyed hundreds
of rail cars in the South Chicago Panhandle yards.
The strike only finally came
to an end when the railroad started hiring non-union workers
to replace those it lost.
The train started moving again.
The ordeal had cost the railroads millions
of dollars in lost revenue and destroyed property,
and the strikers had lost more than $1 million in wages.
The Pullman Company was forced to divest its company town,
which became part of Chicago,
after the federal government conducted an inquiry
and called the company's actions
in the town un-American.
In the aftermath of the strike,
in an effort to placate still angry workers,
the Cleveland Administration designated the first Monday
in September as a Labor Day,
but public sentiment had been stirred against the strikers
who were largely immigrant workers.
The influx of immigrant workers took advantage
of the growing number
of industrial jobs available in cities,
but these jobs tended to be exploitative
and low-paying as well,
even as the country's GDP became the greatest in the world.
Wealthy Gilded Age moguls such as John D. Rockefeller,
Andrew Carnegie, Cornelius Vanderbilt,
and J.P. Morgan were known for their philanthropy,
but their critics also labeled them robber barons
for building their empires on the backs
of an exploited working class using tactics
like intimidation, union-busting, fraud,
and monopolies to gain an edge on their competition.
Muckrakers, or journalists who exposed corruption
among the elite, helped draw public attention
to these issues.
In 1906, Upton Sinclair published "The Jungle,"
his famous account of the grizzly, dangerous,
and unsanitary conditions in the meat packing industry,
which resulted in public outcry and legislation.
Ida Tarbell wrote a 19-part series
for McClure Magazine in 1902 about Rockefeller,
resulting in his Standard Oil company being broken up
for being a monopoly.
Meanwhile, as the rich got richer,
the cities were filling with tenements and slums
as their populations grew.
Another muckraker, the Photographer Jacob Riis,
became famous in 1890 when he published
a book called "How The Other Half Lives,"
depicting his photographs
of New York City slums, which prompted city officials
to try to improve the conditions there.
When the Great Blizzard of 1888 dropped between 40
to 50 inches of snow on the New York area,
more than 200 people died in New York City alone.
Most found buried in snow drifts along city sidewalks.
But in contrast to the extreme poverty,
technological marvels like new bridges, trolley lines,
subways, elevators, and skyscrapers were bringing the cities
into the industrial age.
Thomas Edison invented a long-lasting light bulb in 1879
and the Pearl Street Power Station
was bringing electric light to a small number
of customers in New York City.
By the light of the electric light bulb,
people read newspaper accounts of the Kentucky Meat shower,
a mysterious event that occurred March 6th, 1876.
Residents of Olympia Springs, Kentucky were shocked
to find large chunks of meat falling from the sky,
which was never fully explained,
despite attempts to investigate it.
Though the favored local explanation
was that it was a vulture vomit.
Construction on the Brooklyn Bridge,
which connects the city's boroughs of Manhattan
and Brooklyn over the East River began in 1869.
When it opened in 1883,
it was the longest suspension bridge in the world.
It was an architectural
and engineering accomplishment masterminded
by John Augustus Roebling, who had developed his own method
for weaving wire cables.
After an onsite accident killed him
at the beginning of the project,
his son, Washington Roebling took
over management of the project.
At least 20 workers were killed during construction
and many more were used to construct the foundations
of the bridge towers.
Workers toiled inside the caisson underwater
at nearly double the normal atmospheric pressure
and when they returned to the surface,
had symptoms of what was then called caisson disease,
but today would be known as the bends.
When decompression occurs too quickly,
bubbles of nitrogen form in the bloodstream
and can result in sharp pains, slurred speech,
muscular paralysis, vomiting, and cramps.
Washington Roebling too suffered from the caisson sickness
and became bedridden,
though his wife, Emily Warren Roebling stepped into serve
as a liaison between her husband and the construction team.
When the bridge was finished, she was the first person
to cross it by carriage, carrying a rooster
as a symbol of victory.
The Gilded Age was a time of enormous economic swings
with the United States experiencing
unprecedented economic growth,
but also marred by economic downturns
that sent prices crashing.
In what became known as the Panic of 1893,
problems with international investments,
including failed land speculation
in South Africa and Australia,
and a railroad bubble caused by the railroads,
over-building and vastly outpacing demand led people
to make a run on banks, withdrawing their money.
A series of banks failed
and many companies went bankrupt,
including the Northern Pacific and Union Pacific Railways.
This led to a huge spike in unemployment.
Many people also lost their life savings
in the bank collapses,
numerous farms had to cease operations
and stock prices declined.
People faced starvation, turning to any work they could find
to help feed their families.
President Grover Cleveland was blamed for the crisis
and his administration had taken heat
for the way it put down the Pullman strikes,
so his Democratic Party suffered big losses
during the elections of 1894.
In the next presidential election in 1896,
the Democratic candidate, William Jennings Bryan was backed
by the populist People's Party,
but he failed to beat
the Republican candidate, William McKinley.
By the end of the Gilded Age, many people had become fed up
with extreme wealth inequality, abusive tycoons,
and widespread poverty,
and were ready to usher in a new era of reform.
When after McKinley was assassinated,
President Theodore Roosevelt took office in 1901.
(tense music)
By the end of the 19th century,
the United States seemed to have achieved
its manifest destiny.
The country now stretched from one ocean to the other.
It had survived a horrific and bloody civil war
and stood on the precipice of a new century.
Now looking to expand its political, social,
and economic resources outside
of the North American continent,
the United States began
to extend its influence
on neighboring islands and territories.
The first was the Hawaiian Kingdom.
Located 2,400 miles
or roughly 3,900 kilometers from the US mainland,
the Hawaiian islands had been ruled
by the Kamehameha Dynasty
since the late 1700s.
In 1846, under the presidency of John Tyler,
the United States had recognized the independence
of the Hawaiian Kingdom
and opened trade with the island nation.
Enterprising Americans also secured vast sugar plantations
on the island and American-born immigrants began
to flood to Hawaii.
The United States and the Kingdom of Hawaii
had frequent disagreements over the sugar trade.
And while the Hawaiians appealed
for relief from the US government,
it was frequently ignored.
As the presence of US natives began to overtake the island,
so too did the presence of the US Military.
On January, 1887,
the US began leasing Pearl Harbor
from the Kingdom of Hawaii, giving US-born Hawaiians
the confidence to begin plotting
against the Hawaiian natives and the government.
In July, 1887, they launched a rebellion
and forced the king to agree to what has become known
as the Bayonet Constitution, which stripped the king of many
of his powers and gave more power
to the foreign white plantation owners.
In 1891, the Hawaiian King Kalakaua passed away,
leaving the throne, an unsteady government,
and an economically crippled Hawaii
to his sister, Liliuokalani.
Queen Liliuokalani immediately began work trying
to undo the damage done by the Bayonet Constitution
and by 1893 was preparing to organize a rewriting
of the Hawaiian Government.
In direct contrast, the Committee of Safety,
a political council of white US
and European-born landowners,
began raising forces to once again overthrow the government.
Both sides quickly mobilized troops
and the Committee of Safety declared the Queen deposed
and established a Provincial Republic of Hawaii led
by Sanford B. Dole.
The US Navy responded to a request
for aid from the new provincial republic
and arrived to keep the peace,
naturally in favor of the American-born rebels.
The queen was placed under house arrest
and never attempted to fight back,
hoping to avoid any unnecessary bloodshed.
In Washington, President Grover Cleveland reacted with shock
and horror and condemned the provincial republic
as an illegal coup which did not have the support
of the US Government.
Despite this, and several inquiries into the events
which had caused the coup, the Republic of Hawaii
was officially declared legitimate in 1894.
Queen Liliuokalani made clear her opposition
to the unlawful coup for the rest of her life,
but maintained that her decision not
to fight the US-backed rebels would save lives.
(suspenseful music)
In February, 1895 on the island of Cuba,
rebels were fighting for independence
from Spain's colonial rule.
Graphic portrayals of Spain's efforts
to quell the rebellion were shared by several US newspapers
and among the American public, support for the rebels grew.
The fighting also created economic
and political instability in an area very close to the US,
which concerned some Americans.
In April, 1895, Spain announced an armistice
and instituted a program
to give Cubans limited powers of self-government.
However, the US had long been interested
in ridding the Western Hemisphere
of European colonial powers.
The US saw its opportunity when an American battleship,
the USS Maine, mysteriously sank while stationed
in the Havana Harbor on February 15th, 1891,
killing 268 members of the crew.
Using "Remember the Maine" as a call to action,
pro-war propagandists drummed up public support
for the conflict,
blaming Spain for the sinking of the Maine.
The US quickly issued resolutions that declared Cuba's right
to independence and demanded the withdrawal
of Spain's armed forces
and authorized President William McKinley
to use force to ensure the withdrawal occurred.
The US also stated it had no intention to annex Cuba itself.
The Spanish Government rejected the American's ultimatum
and immediately severed diplomatic relations with the US.
McKinley responded with a naval blockade
of Cuba on April 22nd, 1898,
and issued a call for 125,000 military volunteers.
First US forces attacked the Spanish naval squadron anchored
in Manila Bay in the Spanish colony of the Philippines.
The fleet was destroyed in just two hours
and Commodore George Dewey even paused the battle
of Manila Bay to order his crew a second breakfast.
Fewer than 10 Americans were lost in this battle,
while the Spanish lost almost 400.
Next, American forces zeroed in
on the Spanish Caribbean Fleet
under general William Shafter,
an army which included future President Theodore Roosevelt
and his first volunteer cavalry, the Rough Riders,
advanced on land toward the city of Santiago.
The Rough Riders were instrumental
in the Battle of San Juan Hill
in which they captured the hill
and used it as a strategic place from which
to attack the Spanish military stronghold in Santiago.
The US Army drove the Spanish Navy out
of Santiago's port
by approaching the city from multiple points.
Then the US Navy proceeded
to destroy Spain's ships on July 3rd allowing
for a relatively safe siege on the city.
A cease fire was signed August 12th.
The US Military's force had so dwarfed Spain's power
that future Secretary of State John Hay described
the conflict as a splendid little war.
The Treaty of Paris officially ending the war
was signed December 10th, 1898.
In it, Spain renounced its claims to Cuba,
ceded Guam and Puerto Rico to the United States,
and transferred the Philippines to the United States
for $20 million.
However, Filipinos were not happier under American control,
and the Philippine -American War began in February of 1899
and lasted until 1902.
10 times more US troops died suppressing revolts
in the Philippines than in defeating Spain.
The McKinley Administration also used
the Spanish American-War as a pretext
to annex the independent State of Hawaii.
The US emerged from the war a world power
with a new stake in international politics.
This would soon lead the US
to play a determining role in the affairs of Europe
and the rest of the globe.
(tense music)
Spurred to action by the suffering caused
by recessions in the late 1890s,
the turn of the 20th century was characterized
by a desire for change.
Many people were tired of the tight alliances
between powerful Gilded Age politicians
and businessmen, as well as the problems caused
by rapid industrialization
and urbanization like the growth of slums,
widespread pollution and increased exploitation of labor.
With Former Vice President Theodore Roosevelt
newly established in the head office
after president William McKinley was assassinated,
the progressives were set
to transform the American landscape
into something far more modern.
Roosevelt who at 43 was the youngest president
in the nation's history, came into office in 1901
with enthusiasm for the public good.
Unlike presidents before him,
he wielded the Sherman Antitrust Act to breakup monopolies,
including the railroad owned by J.P. Morgan.
The company, Northern Securities,
controlled almost all railroad shipping
across the Northern US
and in 1902, Roosevelt went on the offense
and took the matter to the Supreme Court,
which sided with Roosevelt.
And whereas the former president,
Grover Cleveland had sent federal troops
to quell a railroad strike in the 1880s,
when Roosevelt was faced
with a large-scale coal miner strike in 1902,
he sent representatives to serve as a neutral mediator.
Roosevelt easily won reelection in 1904,
campaigning on his square deal platform of trust-busting,
conserving natural resources, and protecting the consumer.
Like in the Gilded Age,
immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe were continuing
to arrive in the US in large numbers
during the progressive age.
Between 1900 and the outbreak of war in Europe in 1914,
more than 13 million immigrants arrived.
This meant the issues of slums
and tenements that were so prevalent
during the Gilded Age were only growing.
The progressives, who were mostly middle-class,
white social reformers saw the urban poor
as a social concern.
As early as 1889, reformers,
Jane Addams and Ellen Gates Starr opened Hull House
in Chicago, one of the first social settlements
in North America.
It provided social services,
including early child education
and adult education to poor immigrants.
Progressive activists each had certain issues
they felt were more important to address,
so reform movements were a patchwork of efforts
that covered a wide swath of social ills.
Some progressive reformers sought to expand the powers
of government to reign
in the negative aspects of capitalism.
Companies could no longer simply operate unregulated
with the advent of state factory inspectors
and public health bureaus, which were tasked
with minimizing unsafe working conditions,
stopping poisoned food from being sold
and tamping down on contagious diseases.
One event that prompted greater corporate regulation
was the Great Molasses Flood of 1919,
which occurred in Boston when
a tank containing 2.3 million gallons of molasses exploded
and sent a wave of the sticky molasses
through the streets of the city.
The wave was said to move at up to 35 miles per hour
and be up to 25 feet tall.
21 people died and more than 150 were injured,
and an area of several blocks was flooded up
to two to three feet.
The tank was used by the purity distilling company
to store molasses before it was taken
by pipeline to be fermented
to produce ethanol, an ingredient in alcoholic beverages
and a key component in munitions.
Though the company claimed the tank was blown up
by anarchists, a class action lawsuit was brought on behalf
of the victims and a court-appointed auditor found
the company was responsible.
It was one of the first class action lawsuits
in Massachusetts and provided cash payments
to the families of victims.
Progressive reformers sought to clean up big business
and the government in a variety of ways,
including through the adoption of more amendments
to the Constitution.
The Sixteenth Amendment, which made it legal to graduate
the income tax based on a person's income was added in 1909
and the Seventeenth Amendment attempted
to make elections more fair
by instituting the direct election of senators rather than
by state legislatures, which could be controlled
by political bosses in 1913.
Other political reforms thought
to give citizens more direct control
over their governments
by instituting the initiative and the referendum,
which let citizens put proposed laws on a ballot
without needing support from their legislators.
Reformers also sought
to streamline government via the short ballot,
which was intended to increase government accountability
and clarity and public utility commissions sought
to stabilize the pricing of city gas
and water supplies,
street car fairs and railroad shipping while zoning boards
and city planning commissions sought to clean up slums,
improve polluted water supplies,
and bring order to chaotic land markets.
Other reformers focused on preventing the spread
of venereal diseases, stopping prostitution,
and taking other measures for public health and morality.
Among these, the Woman's Christian Temperance Union,
the Anti-Saloon League,
and the Young Men's Christian Association, YMCA,
led efforts to promote temperance or abstaining from alcohol
and discouraging premarital sex.
Temperance and prohibition were causes taken up
by a great number of progressive reformers
who saw alcohol as an evil that spawned a variety
of other issues like domestic violence and poverty.
These activists known as The Dries
helped set the stage
for various states to pass legislation banning the sale,
possession or transport of alcohol.
In 1907, Georgia and Alabama were the first states
to go dry, followed by Oklahoma, Mississippi,
North Carolina, and Tennessee.
By 1917, 2/3 of the states had some form
of prohibition laws
and roughly three quarters
of the population lived in dry areas.
With the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment
to the Constitution in 1919,
which kicked off the era of alcohol prohibition in the US,
this patchwork was given federal support.
Not all reform projects were undertaken
by middle-class white people.
The progressive era also saw Black communities
in the segregated South take up reform projects
like improving schools,
seeking out larger shares of state budgets,
engaging in legal action to secure equal rights,
and environmental efforts.
At the same time, however,
the country was deep in a period known as the nadir
of race relations, which brought some
of the worst racial violence and racist policies into being.
During this time, African Americans lost access to many
of the rights improvements they had gained
during the reconstruction period.
Violence, lynchings, segregation,
and legalized racial discrimination all proliferated.
In reaction, African Americans began increasingly
to move north in a period known as the Great Migration.
Many of those who migrated moved to northern cities such
as New York, Chicago, Cleveland, and Philadelphia.
They still faced serious hostility as well as segregation
and widespread racism.
In the Midwest and West,
many places were known as sundown towns,
which promised African Americans
that they would face violence
if they remained there overnight.
When President Woodrow Wilson was voted into office in 1912,
he made new efforts to segregate
the federal government's facilities.
The 1915 film "Birth of a Nation" celebrated
the original Ku Klux Klan
and is credited
with bringing the Klan back into power in the 1920s,
more power in fact than it had ever had before.
By 1924, the Klan had four million members
and significant influence over the governments
of several Southern and Western States.
Mob violence against African Americans was widespread.
Three dozen cities across the US
saw white supremacist violence in the summer of 1919,
which became known as the Red Summer.
White mobs murdered at least 43 Black men that year,
but a report delivered to President Wilson indicated
that the states were unwilling to take any action
to prosecute the murders.
Many former Black soldiers
who had returned from deployment in World War I were angered
and frustrated by these conditions
after having fought for their country.
From a progressive reform perspective,
many people felt that race relation problems
actually stemmed from a society
that was being integrated
and reformers fought for increased segregation.
Between 1895 and 1910,
progressives in Southern States helped deny Black people
the right to vote by popularizing the Grandfather Clause,
which restricted voting rights to men who were allowed
to vote or whose male ancestors were allowed
to vote before 1867.
This disenfranchised Black voters
because the Fifteenth Amendment,
which provided them the right to vote,
was not passed until 1870.
The Supreme Court declared
the Grandfather Clause unconstitutional in 1915,
but its use persisted.
It was not until the Voting Rights Act of 1965
that the Fifteenth Amendment was enforceable.
As the Black vote was being forced out,
voting power for white women was on its way in.
Organizations like the Woman's Christian Temperance Union
advocated for women suffrage,
while they worked on other issues like prohibition.
In addition to sexist attitudes at the time,
some opposed female suffrage
because they feared the women's vote would tip the scales
on issues they were against, such as eliminating child labor
and prohibiting alcohol,
and increase the share of socialists in the voting pool.
In 1916, Alice Paul formed the National Women's Party,
which was focused on getting women the right
to vote nationally.
When the US entered World War I in 1917 to replace the men
who left to fight, women moved into workplaces
that traditionally were closed to them.
The Nineteenth Amendment,
which prohibited discrimination in voting on the basis
of sex was adopted on August 18th, 1920.
The US sought to be a world leader in other areas.
The quest for an explorer to reach the North Pole,
considered the last unexplored area,
of the Northern Hemisphere,
inspired competition between British,
Norwegian and American teams.
Numerous journeys were attempted.
In 1909, the New York Times announced that explorer
and former US Navy Commander Robert Peary
had successfully reached the North Pole,
but his victory was marred
by another American Explorer Frederick Cook,
who claimed he had visited the Pole a year earlier.
The competing claims drew significant controversy
with people unsure of who to credit with the victory.
Newspapers polled their readers
on which explorer they thought had been victorious.
In January, 1911,
Peary appeared before a subcommittee
of the House of Representatives
to defend his claim, which narrowly voted for Peary
to receive recognition for the feat.
The Bill of Recognition that was signed into law
by President William Howard Taft,
however, did not credit Peary
with the North Pole's discovery,
but rather more generally lauded him
for his Arctic exploration.
The question remains today whether Cook
or Peary ever made it to the Pole.
In 1904, the US took over efforts from the French
to build a canal that connected the Atlantic
and Pacific oceans.
Through a 50 mile stretch of Panama.
The idea of a Panama Canal dated back
to the earliest explorers
of the Americans, who realized it would be a useful shortcut
between Europe and Eastern Asia.
Under direction from President Roosevelt,
the US fought back mosquito-born illnesses
stubbornly excavated through the local mountain range
and devised a system of locks
and dams that would move boats across uneven water levels.
The canal officially opened on August 15th, 1914,
and at the time was the most expensive project in US history
costing the US government around $375 million at the time.
Added to its cost is the human toll.
Thousands of workers died during its construction,
but good records were not kept.
At least 5,600 workers were listed
as having been killed between 1904 and 1913,
but this is thought to be a significant under-count.
The construction of the Panama Canal proved
to be a critical boost
to global trade routes for the 20th century.
It would later be recognized as one of the marvels
of the modern world.
It was one of the progressive era's
most notable technological achievements.
(suspenseful music)
As European countries took sides in the conflict
between Austria, Hungary and Serbia in 1914,
President Woodrow Wilson declared the United States
was going to remain neutral in
what was then being called the Great War.
However, after a German submarine sank
the British ocean liner Lusitania in 1915,
killing over 1,000 people,
including 128 Americans,
public opinion on US involvement began to change.
In 1917, the British intercepted a coded message
from German Foreign Minister Arthur Zimmermann
to the German Minister in Mexico proposing
an alliance between the countries
to take back Mexican territory if the US were
to enter the war on the side of the allies.
Public outcry against this plan as well
as against the ongoing German submarine attacks
on non-military vessels led Wilson to ask Congress
to declare war on Germany.
Congress agreed on April 6th, 1917,
and soon passed the Selective Service Act,
instituting the first draft since the Civil War,
leading about 2.8 million men
to be drafted alongside another 2 million
who joined the military voluntarily.
German Americans were required
to register themselves with the government
and thousands were arrested and interrogated.
Some were in interned for the duration
of the war in two prisoners
of war camps located in Georgia and Utah.
At first, the home front was relatively unprepared
to support the war effort.
The entire economy
and US population needed to help keep the money, soldiers,
food, supplies and munitions flowing.
The federal government created many new agencies
to help the economy pivot to support the war effort,
and to produce propaganda.
A week after declaring war on Germany,
Wilson established the Committee on Public Information,
A bureau dedicated to creating pro-war propaganda.
Using photographs, movies, rallies, scripted speeches,
press reports, and public meetings,
the CPI fostered American patriotism
and stoked anti-German sentiment.
With the passage of the Espionage Act of 1917
and the Sedition Act of 1918,
criticism of the government
or the war effort was essentially outlawed.
A particular focus was put on children
and youth organizations who were expected
to teach patriotism
and to help encourage support for the war.
The US Food Administration instructed the American public
to economize their food budgets
and grow what were known
as victory gardens in their backyards
to feed their families.
A constitutional amendment applied an income tax
to high earners and businesses faced other new taxes
on their excess profits, which all helped fund the war.
Most new funding, however, came from the sale of war bonds.
Many women began working in traditionally male professions
to assist the war effort,
such as on assembly lines making munitions.
Others worked for the military as support personnel
or nurses stateside and overseas.
The Army Signal Corps employed female switchboard operators
to help with communication along the Western Front.
These women were highly trained and bilingual
in English and French.
But because the war department forbade women except
as nurses in hospitals, they were hired only reluctantly.
Ultimately, women were accepted in order
to free up more men for the Front.
American men who went to fight in France
were enthusiastically greeted
by the worn down allied troops.
The first elements of the American expeditionary forces,
under the command of General John J. Pershing,
arrived in France in June, 1917.
By early 1918, US forces were arriving
at a rate of 10,000 a day,
which had a significant impact on the ally's ability
to push back the German's powerful spring offensive.
While American commanders initially
were using flawed tactics that others had already abandoned,
resulting in attacks with high casualty rates,
the infusion of US troops contributed
to the ally's strategic position and improved morale.
During the 100 Days Offensive by the allies in 1918,
American forces launched the Meuse-Argonne Offensive.
Over 47 days, 1.2 million American troops drove
the Germans back 40 miles.
More than 26,000 American soldiers died.
The 100 Days Offensive helped the allies win the war,
which was officially declared won on November 11th, 1918.
Overall, in less than six months of fighting,
the US suffered 53,402 battle deaths
and another 63,114 people died
from accidents and disease.
The US promptly ended wartime contracts
and brought troops home,
but the US at the time lacked programs
to help veterans readjust to civilian life.
In January, 1919, the US joined the other allies
in Paris to negotiate peace.
President Wilson brought a list of 14 points,
some of which ended up in the final agreement,
including the creation of a League of Nations,
the first worldwide intergovernmental organization dedicated
to maintaining world peace.
The Treaty of Versailles was signed on June 28th, 1919,
but the US never ratified the treaty,
and instead made a separate peace treaty with Germany.
Wilson, a Democrat, had refused to bring
any leading Republicans to the peace talks
as he sought peace without victory.
Republicans controlled the Senate after the election of 1918
and were outraged that Wilson refused to discuss the war,
as they wanted Germany's unconditional surrender.
Because the Senators were divided,
Democrats supporting Wilson against the Irreconcilables
or the Republicans
and some Democrats who were against the treaty,
it proved impossible
to obtain the 2/3 majority needed to pass.
The Democrats who opposed the treaty represented those
among the American public, mostly Irish Catholics
and German Americans who were intensely opposed
to the treaty because they thought it favored the British.
On November 19th, 1919,
for the first time in its history,
the Senate rejected a peace treaty.
Under Wilson's successor, Warren G. Harding,
the US-German Peace Treaty was signed August 25th, 1921.
The treaty allowed for American-German cooperation not under
the purview of the League of Nations.
(suspenseful music)
After the First World War,
the US entered a time of post-war recovery.
The economy boomed, construction took off,
and consumer goods like automobiles
and electricity became far more accessible.
The decade was a time of bold innovation
and experimentation as well as significant backlash
to these things from people
who didn't like the direction
the country's culture seemed to be taking.
This tumultuous time became known as the Roaring Twenties.
For the first time ever, in the 1920s, more Americans- 51%-
lived in cities than in villages or on farms.
New norms, which were the product of trends
that had been building for decades transformed city life,
particularly for women.
At the start of the decade between 1/4
and 1/3 of unmarried urban women workers lived alone
in private apartments
or boarding houses rather than at home with their parents
according to old Victorian culture.
These new women visited public amusements like dance halls,
amusement parks, and movie theaters,
which drew in young people going on dates.
A structure that was replacing the old courting culture.
People now had time for such things.
As factories and shops mechanized,
the urban blue collar worker was spending less time working.
The average work week fell from 55.9 hours in 1900
to 44.2 In 1929.
While blue collar wages rose by 25%,
many Americans had extra money to spend in the 1920s due
to rising incomes and easily available credit,
and it was becoming increasingly socially acceptable
to spend money on consumer goods
and accumulate debt on those goods even
if they were not absolute necessities.
The nation's total wealth more than doubled between 1920
and 1929, people bought tickets to the movies
to see stars like Charlie Chaplin and Rudolph Valentino.
By the mid 1920s,
movie theaters were selling 50 million tickets each week,
a sum equal to roughly half the US population.
They bought ready-to-wear fashion,
which was being mass produced
and therefore becoming more affordable.
They bought radios.
In the first ever live radio transmission
to the public, radio station,
KDKA in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania broadcast
the presidential election results on November 2nd, 1920.
By the end of the 1920s,
there were radios in more than 12 million households.
In 1912, an estimated 16%
of American households had electricity.
By the mid 1920s, more than 60% did.
Appliances that required electricity
like the washing machine,
the freezer and the vacuum cleaner were popular purchases
and people bought automobiles,
which were an affordable luxury.
The Ford Model T cost $260 in 1924,
which translates to just about $4,000 today.
But even as some people were experiencing wealth
and prosperity, others were struggling to get by.
Extreme wealth inequality,
which had troubled the progressives
and defined the Gilded Age persisted.
The income of the top 0.1% of families equaled the income
of the bottom 42% during the '20s
and over 40% of Americans got by
on less than $1,500 each year,
or the poverty line at the time.
Most people living outside
of cities did not experience the prosperity
of the Roaring Twenties.
Farm prices hit rock bottom in the aftermath of World War I.
The proliferation of cars meant people were more able
to travel wherever they wanted
and many of the young people of the day wanted to go out
and dance at jazz clubs.
Jazz music was brought north by Black artists
who had come from New Orleans where the form originated.
Chicago became the art form's new center
with the city boasting more than 100 jazz clubs.
Whites and Blacks began mixing socially
for the first time in the Black & Tan Clubs of Chicago.
Poet Langston Hughes wrote that,
"Midnight was like day,"
referring to the city's music-filled nightlife.
Musicians such as Louis Armstrong,
Jelly Roll Morton and Ethel Waters drew crowds
to dance halls and people danced
in new African American inspired styles.
The Charleston, the cakewalk, the turkey trot,
and the flea hop were all popular dances of the time.
Some major dance clubs at the time were the Cotton Club
in Harlem, New York where Duke Ellington's band played,
and the Grand Terrace Cafe in Chicago
where Earl Hines' band played.
Later, the center of jazz music moved to New York City
where the Harlem Renaissance was in full swing,
but because jazz music was pioneered by African Americans
and represented a departure from traditionally white forms
of music, significant backlash built in response
to jazz's rising popularity.
People decreed for the supposed moral disasters
it created, its roots in Black culture,
and some termed it the devil's music.
By the end of the 1920s,
at least 60 communities across the nation had banned jazz
from being played in public dance halls.
Radio stations carried jazz tunes
to listeners across the nation
and 100 million jazz phonograph records were sold
in 1927 alone.
But because of discrimination
and racism, these were mainly recordings of white bands
that sounded similar to the Black musicians
who pioneered the genre.
Thomas Edison, the inventor of the phonograph,
ridiculed jazz music saying
it sounded better played backwards.
And Shaw Faulkner,
president of the General Federation of Women's Clubs,
a powerful alliance of women, social,
and reform groups that launched
a crusade against jazz in 1921,
once said that jazz was originally the accompaniment
of the voodoo dance, stimulating half crazed barbarians
to the vilest of deeds.
The increasing visibility of Black culture and jazz
and blues music, as well as the appearance of millions
of African Americans who moved north
during the Great Migration
inspired significant racist backlash.
Millions of people joined the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s,
raising its membership to five million by 1925.
By mid decade, the group was in control of the governments
of Indiana, Texas, Oklahoma, and Colorado,
and was enormously powerful in several other states,
including California and Georgia.
The fundamentalist, conservative paramilitary group
initiated white supremacist violence
and also targeted Jews, Catholics, Asians,
and the so-called new women.
One of the worst instances
of violence was the Tulsa race massacre in 1921 when
a mob burned the Black neighborhood of Greenwood
in Tulsa, Oklahoma to the ground killing dozens.
The KKK only grew in power in Oklahoma after the incident.
In general, the '20s were a time characterized
by nativism and anti-immigrant feelings.
A red scare in which people attempted to hunt,
expose, and prosecute communists occurred from 1919 to 1920
and the Klan-backed National Origins Act of 1924
severely restricted immigration from Eastern Europe
and Asia, while favoring immigrants
from Northern Europe and Great Britain.
The federal prohibition of alcohol in 1920,
which banned the production and sale
of alcoholic beverages nationwide was as much inspired
by reformers wishing to cure the country's ills of poverty
and violence as by those
who were against the growing population
of urban-dwelling immigrants in the US.
Anti-German sentiment after World War I inspired
the nickname Kaiser Brew
for the Beer made in German breweries.
Beer, as well as wine, whiskey,
and gin were all banned under the statute,
but enforcement proved nearly impossible
for the federal government.
Smuggling and bootlegging were widespread and speakeasies,
or secret clubs that served illegal alcohol,
popped up in cities.
In 1927, there were an estimated 30,000 illegal speakeasies,
twice the number of legal bars before prohibition.
Federal agents conducted raids on these establishments,
looking for lawbreakers,
but prosecuting the cases proved tricky.
In New York, 7,000 arrests
for liquor law violations resulted in 17 convictions.
Organized crimes such as mafia groups
and gangs worked a profitable
and violent black market for alcohol,
which flourished as consumer demand
went unmet via legitimate means.
These organizations operated in part
by bribing police officers and federal investigators.
Al Capone Chicago organization reportedly took
in $60 million in 1927
and had half the city's police on its payroll.
John D. Rockefeller, who did not drink,
observed in 1932 that
because of prohibition, drinking has generally increased,
the speakeasy has replaced the saloon,
and a vast army of lawbreakers has been recruited
and financed on a colossal scale.
While that may have been true anecdotally,
other reports suggest that nationwide,
drinking actually decreased during prohibition.
According to statistics,
drinking-related deaths from cirrhosis
of the liver in men fell between 1911 and 1929.
Further, it has been found
that alcohol consumption levels did not rebound
to their pre-prohibition levels until the 1960s.
(suspenseful music)
All good times must come to an end,
decreased consumer demand,
you can only buy so many cars and radios,
and mounting consumer debt coupled
with overconfidence in buying stocks,
meant stock was highly overvalued.
On what would become known as Black Thursday,
October 24th, 1929,
the stock market crashed,
triggering the worst economic downturn in American history.
The Great Depression, which marked the end
of the over-consumptive, freewheeling roaring '20s.
Millions of stock shares ended up being worthless
and consumer confidence vanished.
The resulting decrease in consumer spending caused factories
to slow production, laying off workers.
By 1930, four million Americans looking
for work could not find it,
and by 1931, that number was six million.
Many Americans with debt were unable to pay it off
and had their homes foreclosed upon.
Homelessness became more common.
The construction of the Empire State Building,
which would be the first building in the world
to have more than 100 floors,
had broken ground only a few weeks
before the stock market crash.
Many tall buildings were being planned
and constructed during the late 1920s,
a facet of the optimism inherent to the period.
This race into the sky
included five other proposed buildings,
but only the Empire State Building would make it due
to the crash of 1929.
The project was completed in just one year
and 45 days, a record setting speed.
But because of the Great Depression,
there was virtually no demand for office space,
and the building sat mostly empty until the 1940s.
In addition to the economic woes, in 1930,
severe drought swept from Texas to Nebraska,
bringing with it high winds
and dust that killed people, livestock and crops.
This became known as the Dust Bowl,
and it inspired many more people
to migrate from the plains
to the cities in search of work.
From 1930 to 1933,
the economic crisis only continued to get worse as thousands
of banks were forced to close.
President Herbert Hoover tried supporting the failing banks,
but Hoover was a Republican
who believed the government should not directly intervene
in the economy or provide economic relief.
In 1932 with close
to 15 million people unemployed nationwide,
voters overwhelmingly elected
Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt, who took immediate action.
During his first 100 days in office,
the Roosevelt Administration passed legislation to reform
and reopen banks, stabilize industrial,
and agricultural production, and create jobs.
The unemployment rate in 1935 was at a staggering 20%,
so via executive order,
Roosevelt created a permanent jobs program called
the Works Progress Administration.
From 1935 to 1943,
the WPA employed 8.5 million people,
building schools, hospitals, roads,
and other public works, as well as in arts projects,
employing tens of thousands of actors, musicians,
writers, and other artists.
At its height in late 1938,
more than 3.3 million Americans worked for the WPA.
They built more than 4,000 new school buildings,
erected 130 new hospitals,
laid roughly 9,000 miles of storm drains
and sewer lines, built 29,000 new bridges,
constructed 150 new air fields,
paved or repaired 280,000 miles of road,
and planted 24 million trees to alleviate loss
of topsoil during the Dust Bowl.
Among the most famous projects built
by the WPA are the Hoover Dam on the Colorado River,
New York City's Lincoln Tunnel,
the LaGuardia Airport in Queens,
and the iconic red San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge.
New Deal funds were also used for the construction
of Mount Rushmore in South Dakota.
US Presidents George Washington, Thomas Jefferson,
Theodore Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln into the side
of the mountain were carved by a total of about 400 artists.
Tools were forged by blacksmiths
and tramway operators shuttled people and equipment to
and from the base of the remote mountain.
The project cost nearly $1 million,
about 85% of which was from federal funds.
The WPA was criticized for the project's slowness
and inefficiencies, but it was celebrated
for the employment it offered millions
of people suffering during the depression.
Other notable New Deal programs included the creation
of the Social Security Administration
to protect older Americans financially,
the Agricultural Adjustment Act to help farmers get out
of debt, and the US Housing Authority was created
to address homelessness.
The National Labor Relations Act
was passed to protect labor organizing in 1935
and the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 set maximum hours
and minimum wages for most workers.
But not everyone was a fan of Roosevelt's reforms
with conservative opponents
calling them government overreach.
After the elections of 1938,
New Deal policies became more difficult to enact
because the new Congress was less liberal
and less supportive of spending.
The election of these new conservative members
of the Congress was largely due
to a dip in public opinion
towards the Roosevelt Administration
during the economic recession of 1937 to 1938.
With Roosevelt claiming responsibility
for the previous economic improvements,
people blamed him for the backslide.
Nevertheless, the New Deal's popularity helped
the Democratic Party remain the majority party
in national politics into the 1960s.
(tense music)
When the Second World War kicked off in Europe in fall 1939,
the vast majority of Americans were still
in favor of isolation.
President Roosevelt, however, realized the importance
of ensuring that Britain
and France had every chance of success in the conflict.
When France fell completely in June, 1940,
Roosevelt began implementing a Lend-Lease program
with the British, sending war material
and humanitarian supplies on American ships.
On December 7th, 1941, the Japanese fleet at last appeared
and struck at the American Naval base
in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.
The attack did serious damage
to the fleet, destroying three battleships,
and damaging several other vessels.
However, the Japanese were unsuccessful
in destroying the American aircraft carriers.
The attack shocked and appalled Americans.
Japan had hoped the attack would cripple
the American Pacific fleet and allow them
to swiftly take control of the Pacific Theater.
Instead, the Americans recovered with nearly inhuman speed
and in less than six months,
struck a devastating blow against the Japanese Navy
at the Battle of Midway..
The American victory at Midway opened the Pacific
to the US fleet
and allowed for US ground troops to be safely shuttled
to Japanese-held islands.
In Europe, following the general declaration of war on Japan
after Pearl Harbor, Adolf Hitler,
the leader of Nazi Germany,
declared war on the United States,
joining his Axis ally.
The United States, now a part of the Allied Powers,
was eager to help Britain regain control
of the European Theater.
The War Department began planning a series
of military operations to retake North Africa
and Europe from fascist control,
whilst simultaneously planned for a prolonged invasion
of the dozens of islands in the Pacific to aid Australia
and the Philippines from Japan.
The United States was again at war
and this time facing enemies on two separate fronts
on a global scale.
The entire country mobilized, with millions of men enlisting
to serve, and the millions left on the home front adapting
to produce war material
and other goods to support the war effort.
Sadly, the fear and xenophobia
towards Asian Americans caused
by the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor led Roosevelt
to issue Executive Order 9066,
ordering the internment of any and all citizens
who posed a national security threat to the country.
With much of the West Coast
of the United States divided into military districts
for the prosecution of an overseas war,
over 120,000 Japanese Americans,
more than 2/3 of them born in the United States,
were removed from their homes
and settled into camps further inland
and away from US Military operations along the West Coast.
Roosevelt's administration,
as well as the Army High Command,
immediately realized the importance
of liberating Europe as soon as possible.
The early victory against the Japanese Navy
at Midway gave the US Armed forces a chance
to reassess their strategy in the Pacific while planning
for operations in Europe.
After some debate, North Africa was chosen
as the first landing site for US troops
to begin the liberation of the allies in Europe.
In fall 1942, the Allies launched Operation Torch
to strike a quick and decisive blow against
the Axis-controlled North African coast.
The assault was a massive multinational operation involving
the United States, the United Kingdom, India, Canada,
the Netherlands, free France, and Australian forces.
Over the course of a week, the Allied Powers fought
for control of major ports along the African coast
and were successful in occupying much
of Morocco and Algiers.
Operation Torch was the first step in an Allied advance,
which would gradually take control over all of North Africa
and move on to Italy by the fall of 1943.
In the Pacific, US forces embarked on
what was known as an island hopping
or leapfrogging campaign.
Utilizing the strength
and speed of the US Navy, the Americans were able
to quickly deploy US marines
and army forces on the hundreds
of islands under Japanese control.
across the South Pacific.
The strategy worked well,
keeping the Japanese forces under constant threat of attack
and slowly choking their ability to reinforce
and supply important islands.
The Japanese were often forced to take shelter
and fight for every square inch of ground without hope
of reprieve or escape.
Over the course of two years, beginning in the fall of 1942,
the US Armed Forces fought brutal campaigns at Guadalcanal,
Saipan, Peleliu, Iwo Jima, and Okinawa, and many others.
In Europe with the fall of Italy,
the US and the allies turned their attention
to liberating France from Nazi control.
On the other side of the European continent,
the Soviet Union had at long last repulsed
the German invasion of their homeland,
and were steadily pushing the Nazis back toward Germany.
Seizing on the opportunity,
American and British strategists planned
for an audacious amphibious assault on the Normandy beaches
in the North of France.
Under the direction of General Dwight D. Eisenhower,
the Allied Forces launched Operation Neptune,
more popularly known as D-Day, on June 6th, 1944.
Like Operation Torch in North Africa,
D-Day was a multinational assault
and included most of the allied powers
with significant contributions from American, British,
Canadian, Australian, and French forces.
Undoubtedly one of the most well-known moments
of the Second World War, D-Day represented the pinnacle
of Allied cooperation
and marked the beginning of the end for Hitler's Germany
and the Axis powers.
It did not take long for the German occupation of France
to collapse under the weight
of the Allied Liberation following D-Day.
By the winter of 1944,
Allied forces had pushed the Nazi troops to the border
of France and Germany and prepared for winter engagements
through the Ardennes Forest.
As the Soviets continued their relentless assault
in the East, Hitler diverted critical military assets west,
hoping to take the Allies by surprise.
In December, 1944, German forces launched
what would be their final offensive
of the war through the Ardennes.
The assault was initially successful,
pushing Allied forces back.
Fortunately, Allied Air superiority slowed the Nazi advance
and grounded to a halt.
When the offensive finally ended,
the Germans had successfully nearly encircled
a large pocket of US troops and dug in for the winter.
In what would become known as the Battle of the Bulge,
American forces endured relentless artillery bombardments,
surprise attacks, and unforgiving weather conditions,
but never gave up.
When German forces demanded
the American troops to surrender,
their commanding officer allegedly replied
with a single phrase, "Nuts."
When spring came,
so too did the Allied air support,
and Germans were quickly pushed away
and the pocket was relieved.
With their resources exhausted,
their troops surrendering in droves,
and Allied forces pushing in from both east and west,
Germany was at last close to surrender.
It would take a few more months of fierce fighting
until the Soviet troops reached Berlin.
Hitler committed suicide
and the pre-Nazi German government was restored
as the war in Europe at last came to an end.
In the Pacific, island after island fell to the US advance.
By the spring of 1945, the US was preparing for an invasion
of the Japanese home islands,
a prospect that was not relished
by the military or government alike.
In April, 1945,
President Franklin D. Roosevelt died suddenly,
leaving the office to his Vice President Harry Truman.
Truman was immediately informed
of a top secret program which had been experimenting
with the creation of an atomic weapon called
the Manhattan Project.
Led by Physicist Robert Oppenheimer,
the project had brought together leading scientific minds
from across the United States
and beyond to develop an atomic weapon capable
of ending the war.
When Truman inherited the presidency,
he inherited the decision to use the bomb.
Faced with a Japanese Government unwilling to surrender
and what would likely be an incredibly costly series
of ground invasions,
Truman green lit the use of the bombs
as a way to avoid massive casualties.
At 08:15 AM on August 6th, 1945,
the United States dropped Little Boy,
an enriched uranium bomb on the Japanese city of Hiroshima.
It exploded roughly a mile above the city with the force
of 15 kilotons of TNT.
The initial blast destroyed everything within a mile
of the bomb's detonation,
with the exception of
a few earthquake-resistant concrete structures.
The 1,200 foot or 370 meter fireball produced
by the explosion gave off a blinding flash of light
and reached temperatures of 6,000 Celsius
or 10,830 degrees Fahrenheit,
the same as the surface of the sun.
Individuals near the center
of the blast were instantly vaporized,
leaving behind only their shadows
on the bleached white stone.
The fireball reached roughly two miles
or 3.2 kilometers in diameter,
consuming everything in its path.
The devastation caused by the bombing caused roughly 60%
of the casualties with the remaining losses attributed
to injury sustained
and to the radiation, which spread from the explosion site.
Roughly 80,000 to 140,000 civilians
and military personnel were killed
as a result of the bombing.
As word of the full extent of the damage began to spread,
the US Government again entreated the Japanese to surrender,
threatening to drop yet another atomic weapon
if they did not.
Again, the Japanese Government refused
and a second atomic bomb was dropped on the city
of Nagasaki on August 9th.
Fat Man, a plutonium bomb was dropped
at 11:01 AM over Nagasaki's Industrial Valley
and detonated 47 seconds later at 11:02.
Fat Man exploded with the force of 21 Kilotons
of TNT, 40% more than Little Boy had.
However, due to weather conditions,
the bombardiers had dropped the bomb further away
from their intended target, causing much of the explosion
to be contained by the mountains surrounding
the industrial district.
Like the bombing of Hiroshima,
the blast and subsequent fireball consumed everything
within the blast zone and caused the majority of casualties.
Between 60,000 and 80,000 people were killed
as a result of the bombing
with hundreds of thousands wounded.
In total, the bombings of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki took the lives of an estimated 129,000
to 226,000 individuals,
the vast majority of whom were civilians.
On August 10th, the Japanese Government signaled
their willingness to surrender
if their government could remain intact.
The United States answered that the terms would be discussed
after the Japanese formally surrendered.
A brief military coup was attempted on the evening
of August 14th by factions within the government
who wished to fight to the bitter end.
However, it was quickly put down by the Japanese Government.
The following morning, the emperor of Japan issued
a formal statement of surrender.
The Second World War had finally come to an end.
More than 16 million men
and women served in the US Armed Forces over the course
of the war and some 420,000 Americans had given their lives
to help liberate the free world.
In doing so, the United States had left its position
on isolation behind and entered a new age of globalism.
The United States was now a world power
and held much of the responsibility
of what would come next in its hands.
While their alliance with the Soviet Union
during the war had been one of necessity,
relations had deteriorated even
before the war had come to an end.
Worse, with the unleashing of atomic weaponry,
the United States had unwittingly brought on a new age
of warfare and technology,
one that would define the decades to follow.
(tense music)
Despite fighting together against Nazi Germany
in World War II, the US and the Soviet Union
were never truly friendly.
The US was wary of the Soviet's communist system
of government and the atrocities committed
by leader Joseph Stalin.
While the Soviets were angry that the US wanted
to keep them from being a leader
in the international community.
While these grievances were fiercely held,
the conflict that became the Cold War never developed
into violence because of the threat of atomic weapons.
The US adopted a policy known as Containment,
which referred to stopping Russia's attempts
to expand their reach and influence throughout the world.
This strategy provided the rationale
for never before seen arms build up in the US.
The end of World War II had been hastened
by atomic bombs dropped on Japanese cities Hiroshima
and Nagasaki in 1945, demonstrating the US' power
with a new class of weapons.
By 1949, the Soviet Union had tested
its first nuclear weapon, heating up the rivalry.
They were racing to develop even more powerful weapons,
the hydrogen bomb.
In late 1952,
the US detonated a hydrogen bomb in the Marshall Islands
as a test, resulting in an explosion hundreds
of times more powerful than the bombs dropped in Japan.
The Soviet Union followed suit
with its own test in Kazakhstan in 1955.
These tests resulted in devastating health effects
for nearby residents in both locations.
Nevertheless, testing only ramped up in 1958,
during which the US, the Soviets,
and the United Kingdom detonated more
than 100 bombs worldwide.
Following this, the three countries
voluntarily paused testing.
The Cold War affected American life in a variety of ways.
Fears of nuclear warfare inspired drills
in schools and people
to build bomb shelters in their backyards.
Perhaps most destructively,
fears of communist sympathy within the US inspired
the government to form the
House Un-American Activities Committee in 1947,
which was tasked with carrying out investigations
of suspected communists.
Thousands of federal employees were investigated,
many were fired, and some were even prosecuted.
Liberal college professors lost their jobs,
were forced to testify against colleagues,
and others forced to take loyalty oaths.
In Hollywood, hundreds of people were investigated
and more than 500 movie industry professionals lost
their jobs for having liberal beliefs.
Many of these blacklisted writers, directors, actors,
and others were unable to work again for more than a decade.
This period became known as the Red Scare
and is also referred to as McCarthyism
after Senator Joseph McCarthy,
a vehemently anti-communist politician who led the efforts.
Another key symbol
of the Cold War was the Berlin Wall,
built in 1961 between the communist East German
and capitalist West German parts of the city.
Though the communist government claimed its purpose was
to keep the so-called Western fascists out of East Germany,
the wall really functioned
to stop mass defections from east to west.
It was also a solution to the Berlin crisis
of 1958 when Khrushchev demanded
the Allies give up West Berlin, which they had taken
after World War II ended in 1945.
Tensions were high
between the Westerners and Soviet-backed Easterners
even after the wall was constructed.
West Berlin grew prosperous in great contrast to the poverty
of the surrounding East German territory.
The wall between them soon became
an iconic image of the Cold War in Europe.
The impact of the Cold War on daily life
was particularly felt during the nearly two-week conflict
that came to be known as the Cuban Missile Crisis,
when many Americans thought the world was on the brink
of an all-out nuclear war.
The country's standoff nearly tipped into conflict
in October, 1962 when US spy planes
discovered secret Soviet missile bases being constructed
in Cuba just 90 miles from US shores.
Just a year earlier in 1961,
the US had mounted the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion
to try to depose Cuba's
Soviet-sympathetic leader Fidel Castro.
During the 13-day standoff,
US president John F. Kennedy ordered a naval blockade
of Cuba and publicly announced the US was ready
to use military force to neutralize the threat,
but the crisis was resolved
when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev offered
to remove the missiles in exchange
for the US vowing not to invade Cuba
and removing missiles
it had secretly placed in Turkey to target Russia.
The event sobered both the USSR and the US.
In the following year, a direct hotline was installed
between Washington and Moscow
to help diffuse similar situations.
The two countries, along with the United Kingdom,
signed a treaty in 1963,
agreeing to ban several types of nuclear testing.
The Cold War's anti-communist agenda led the US
to various other conflicts abroad in its attempts
to support democratic governments and depose communist ones.
In June, 1950,
the Soviet-backed North Korean People's Army
invaded pro-Western South Korea.
Many American officials feared
that this was the first step in a communist campaign
to take over the world, and that intervening was their duty
in a fight of good versus evil,
US President Harry Truman sent troops to Korea,
but fighting stalled and casualties mounted in a stalemate
of skirmishes across the border.
Nearly five million people died.
More than half of them civilians,
which is a civilian casualty rate worse than those
of World War II or the later Vietnam War.
About 40,000 Americans died in action
and 100,000 were wounded.
After more than two years of negotiations,
the adversary signed an armistice on July 27th, 1953.
Then when the French colonial regime in Vietnam fell
to communists in 1954,
President Dwight D. Eisenhower called
for American intervention under the Domino Theory,
which held that allowing a communist government
to keep power in one nation would lead
to communist takeovers in neighboring nations
with each falling to communism like a row of dominoes.
However, what was intended
as a brief military venture spiraled into a bloody,
unpopular and unsuccessful 10 year-conflict in Vietnam.
While remaining staunchly anti-communist,
upon taking office in 1969,
US President Richard Nixon immediately tried
to soften US relations with the Soviets
and dial back the Cold War via diplomacy.
In 1972, the US and the Soviet Union agreed
to limit the number of nuclear missiles in their arsenals,
but the conflict revved up again
under President Ronald Reagan who wanted
to provide financial and military aid
to those fighting communism
around the world, particularly in Central America.
The Cold War only came to an end
with the Soviet Unions' unraveling under the leadership
of Mikhail Gorbachev, whose government reforms caused power
to shift in the communist block.
Communist regimes began
to collapse in Eastern Europe
under the waning Soviet influence
and democratic governments rose in East Germany,
Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia.
Then West and East Germany were reunified in 1989.
The Soviet Union itself collapsed in 1991,
bringing the Cold War to a close.
(tense music)
While the Declaration of Independence may have declared
that all men are created equal,
the institution of slavery
and persistence of bigotry throughout American history
meant African-Americans faced an uphill battle
to make that declaration of equality feel true.
Despite slavery being abolished in 1865
and the addition of the Fourteenth
and Fifteenth amendments to the Constitution
in 1868 and 1870,
which strengthened the legal rights of freed slaves,
the fact that slavery had been the law of the land
for nearly 100 years cast a long shadow.
Legalized segregation policies as well as everyday racism
and bigotry meant that in many places,
Black people and white people were not allowed
to occupy the same public spaces such as buses, restrooms,
hospitals, prisons, and schools.
At the turn of the century,
conservative Democrats in the South passed policies
that disenfranchised African Americans further
through various social, economic,
and political means such as being prevented from voting.
Sometimes through violent means.
These practices were further entrenched in 1896
by the Supreme Court in the case of Plessy versus Ferguson,
in which the court ruled against a Black man, Homer Plessy,
who was protesting his arrest for refusing
to give up his seat
to a white man on a train in New Orleans,
which was required by Louisiana state law.
"If one race be inferior to the other socially,
the Constitution of the United States cannot put them
upon the same plane,"
the court wrote in its decision.
The court continued to apply this logic
to its decisions on matters of segregation
in the years that followed,
upholding laws that established different rules for Blacks
and whites, laws, which were known as Jim Crow,
a derisive term for a Black man.
Not all of segregation was attributable to laws,
however, discriminatory customs such
as barring Black people from certain jobs,
housing developments or stores were also commonplace.
Throughout these years,
groups fought to desegregate the South
and end disenfranchising practices.
In 1950, fed up with overcrowded,
poorly funded inferior schools the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People,
which had put in decades
of work fighting racial segregation in education,
put together its most compelling legal case
against racial segregation in public schools.
Brown versus Board of Education.
Brown v. Board was actually a grouping of five cases
that all challenged the claim that it was constitutional
for public schools to be racially segregated by law.
The effort was led by lawyer Thurgood Marshall,
who argued that separate educational facilities
were inherently unequal.
In 1954, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously in agreement
with Marshall, legally ending racial segregation in schools
and overruling the doctrine established by Plessy.
While this was a big victory for civil rights advocates,
in reality, it did little to end school segregation
right away due to resistance from racist whites
who didn't want their children to go
to school with Black children.
Meanwhile, resistance was also mounting
against segregated seating on public transportation,
a fight brought to prominence by the actions of Rosa Parks,
an African-American seamstress and civil rights activist
in 1955 when she refused
to give up her seat in the colored section
of a Montgomery, Alabama bus to a white man.
Parks was arrested and fined,
but her actions inspired local Black leaders
to organize the Montgomery Bus Boycott,
led by a young Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr.
During the boycott, 40,000 African Americans
who made up the majority of the city bus's riders refused
to ride the buses in protest
of how they were treated.
Initially, their demands were simply for courtesy,
the hiring of Black drivers and
a first come first seated policy with whites entering
from the bus's front doors
and Blacks from the rear doors as was custom.
However, over the course of the protest,
which lasted over a year, the goals changed to having
the segregated seating policy totally abolished.
On June 5th, 1956, a Montgomery Federal court ruled
that any law requiring racially segregated seating
on buses violated the Constitution's Fourteenth Amendment
and the Supreme Court upheld the lower court's decision
after the city appealed.
The city's buses were integrated December 21st, 1956,
and the boycott ended.
It had lasted more than a year
and is regarded as the first large-scale demonstration
against racial segregation in the US.
Civil rights advocates were obtaining victories,
but the road towards equality was a difficult one.
The buses may have been integrated,
but the bus stops remained segregated
and the new laws were met
with significant resistance and violence.
In one instance, snipers shot into a bus
and shattered both legs
of a pregnant African American writer.
In January, 1957, four Black churches as well as the homes
of several prominent Black leaders
in the Montgomery area were bombed.
In 1956, a group of Southern senators
and congressmen signed the Southern Manifesto,
which declared they would resist racial integration
by all lawful means.
After the decision in Brown v. Board,
state and local officials and a number
of Southern States resisted school integration
and members of the public fought back as well.
When nine African American students attempted
to attend Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas,
in September, 1957,
Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus ordered
the state's National Guard
to block their path on the first day
of school, September 2nd.
Two days later,
a belligerent mob appeared in addition
to the National Guard, again,
preventing the nine students from attending class.
By the end of the month, September 23rd,
the nine were being escorted by Little Rock Police
and attempting to enter the school
through a side door when another angry mob appeared
and tried to rush into the school after them.
Fearing for the students' lives,
officials sent them home.
In response, president Dwight Eisenhower federalized
the National Guard and sent US Army Troops to the scene
to personally guard the students who were finally able
to start attending regular classes.
Though they still had to endure threats and harassment.
Nonviolent protests against segregation such
as sit-ins at whites only lunch counters
and the 1961 Freedom Rides were signature methods used
by civil rights activists protesting segregation
in public spaces throughout the South.
These demonstrations only increased during the presidency
of John F. Kennedy when hundreds
of demonstrations erupted across the nation,
drawing national and international news coverage
as well as backlash and violence.
The Freedom Riders who were interracial members
of the student activist group, Congress for Racial Equality,
CORE, met significant opposition
when they challenged segregation on interstate buses
and bus terminals by riding from Washington, DC
to Jackson, Mississippi.
Though a federal ruling in 1946 had already declared
that segregation in interstate transport was illegal,
they faced resistance and arrests in Virginia
and violent beatings in South Carolina
and were met by a violent mob of over 100 people,
including hostile members of the local police
and members of the Ku Klux Klan
when they reached Anniston, Alabama.
The violence that occurred there prompted organizers
to end the ride,
though efforts continued on a smaller scale.
The media attention garnered by these efforts as well
as Dr. King serving as spokesman for the rides
as they rose to national prominence,
prompted the Kennedy Administration
to take action, directing the Interstate Commerce Commission
to ban segregation in all buses and facilities it oversaw.
The ruling took effect November 1st, 1961.
Though King did not take part in the rides himself,
the rides are credited with showing him
and others involved in the campaign
that nonviolent peaceful protest against the violence
of white Southerners
could garner significant national media attention,
attract sympathy for the cause, and force federal action.
In the spring of 1963,
the Southern Christian Leadership Conference led
by Dr. King, launched a large-scale campaign
of sit-ins, meetings, boycotts of segregated stores,
and marches in Birmingham, Alabama
to protest segregation there
in partnership with the local activist group,
the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, ACMHR.
Activists registered people to vote,
listened to speeches by King about the philosophy
of nonviolence in staged sit-ins.
The boycotts of local businesses were particularly effective
as they were taking place right
before Easter, the second busiest shopping time of the year.
Hundreds were arrested filling the local jails.
After about a week,
the city government obtained a state court order
that said the protests must stop,
but the activists decided to defy it.
The efforts continued on May 2nd
when more than 1,000 African American students marched
in Downtown Birmingham
in what became known as the Children's Crusade.
Hundreds more were arrested, overcrowding the jails.
The City's Commissioner of Public Safety,
Eugene Bull O'Connor authorized the use
of high-pressure hoses against children protestors.
And when adults watching reacted by throwing rocks
and bottles at those wielding the hoses,
Connor ordered the use of police dogs against them.
Images of the violence
triggered outrage nationally and internationally.
Under pressure, the White House sent a facilitator
to help speed negotiations between protest leaders
and members of Birmingham's business community
who were weakening under the sustained boycott.
On May 8th, the group struck a compromise.
Street protests would end immediately
and signs proclaiming whites only
and Blacks only on restrooms
and drinking fountains would be removed.
The Birmingham Truce also called for the release
of jailed protesters on bond,
a plan to desegregate lunch counters,
and the hiring of more African Americans
for jobs around the city.
It was not everything the protestors had hoped to achieve,
but rather a partial success that proved divisive
among activists who thought the protestors
should have held out until all their goals were met.
The city was slowly desegregated in the months
that followed the truce,
but the campaign was not a huge local success.
Rather its significance was in the amount
of national and international attention
it drew to the civil rights cause.
It also led King's reputation as a leader
to grow exponentially.
On August 28th,
King delivered his "I Have a Dream" speech
at the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom,
which was organized in the nation's capital
to advocate for African American civil and economic rights.
It is estimated that 250,000 people attended,
making the assembly, which was planned in cooperation
with DC Police, a logistical feat.
The march sought to address the fact
that many jobs were entirely closed to Black applicants
and those that were open to them often paid poorly
or offered little upward mobility.
The year 1963 was the centennial anniversary
of the Emancipation Proclamation,
the declaration of the end of slavery,
and organizers of the march wished
to emphasize that change was long overdue.
The march brought together many different activists
and organizers, but it was King's speech
at the Lincoln Memorial that was memorialized
as a masterpiece of rhetoric
as it called for an end to racism.
The march and the speech are credited
with inspiring the federal government to act
on civil rights through the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
which outlawed discrimination based on race, color,
religion, sex, or national origin in public accommodations,
public education and employment,
and the Voting Rights Act of 1965,
which prohibited racial discrimination in voting.
These were the two most important pieces
of civil rights legislation
to be passed since the reconstruction period,
and brought many of the Jim Crow policies to an end.
(tense music)
No conflict was more representative
of the US' Cold War commitment
to getting involved in elective fights
with communist governments,
even under unfavorable circumstances, than the Vietnam War.
Led by the strongly anti-communist politician,
Ngo Dinh Diem, who was nevertheless
a repressive dictator who called for the arrest and torture
of suspected communist sympathizers,
the South Vietnamese fought the communist North Vietnamese
for control of the country.
In 1964 under President Lyndon Johnson,
the US began regular air raids of North Vietnamese targets,
dropping bombs in a program known
as Operation Rolling Thunder.
Between 1964 to 1973,
the US also secretly dropped more than two million tons
of bombs on North Vietnamese supply lines
and neighboring Laos,
despite the country being neutral in the conflict.
In 1965, Johnson called for a significant increase
in American troops deployed to Vietnam.
By June, 1965,
82,000 combat troops were stationed in Vietnam.
At the end of July, 100,000 troops were sent
and another 100,000 were sent in 1966.
South Korea, Thailand, Australia,
and New Zealand also sent troops,
but in much smaller numbers.
North Vietnam was aided by China and the Soviet Union.
By November, 1967,
the number of American troops in Vietnam
was approaching 500,000,
but support for the unsuccessful war was waning.
A strong anti-war movement in the US spawned protests
against the draft,
the large number of civilian casualties
the war was generating, and against the US's support
for the corrupt Southern Vietnamese dictatorship.
Many troops stationed in Vietnam were also low on morale
with many turning to drugs, initiating mutinies,
and developing post-traumatic stress disorder.
Between 1966 and 1973,
more than 503,000 US military personnel deserted,
and another 500,000 dodged the draft.
Nevertheless, when President Nixon took office,
he announced that he believed a silent majority
of Americans supported the war.
Over the next few years, the death toll grew,
including the more than 400 unarmed civilian US troops
killed in the village of Mai Lai in 1968.
Peace talks were unsuccessful.
Anti-war sentiment in the US only increased.
Over 250,000 people gathered
to demonstrate against the war in Washington DC
on November 15th, 1969.
Nixon ended the draft in 1972 moving
to an all volunteer army,
but in 1971, the leaked Pentagon papers had revealed results
of a secret DOD study
that showed Nixon's Administration had escalated conflict
in Vietnam, further eroding public support for the war.
In January, 1973, the United States
and North Vietnam ended open hostilities,
though conflict between North
and South Vietnam continued until 1975.
When the North took over the Southern city of Saigon,
the US's effort had failed,
and the 20-year war took an enormous toll.
An estimated 2 million Vietnamese were killed,
while 3 million were wounded
and another 12 million became refugees.
About 58,000 Americans were killed.
Many anti-war Americans lost trust in their government,
while others who may have been pro-war
no longer felt invincible.
The conflict bitterly divided the US
and its impact would be felt for many years.
(suspenseful music)
Following the end of World War II in 1946,
tensions rose between the capitalistic United States
and the communist Soviet Union,
each country wished to prove its economic system
to be better than the other,
and to show the world they had the key
to political superiority.
Both countries sought
to demonstrate their technological superiority
by being the first nation to put a human being into space,
which at the time was an as yet undone feat
that each knew was only a few years away.
Both countries had developed intercontinental missiles,
which provided critical electronic technology
and rocketry that could boost small payloads into orbit.
The competition began on August 2nd, 1955.
When first the US, then the USSR announced they intended
to launch artificial satellites.
Two years later, on October 4th, 1957,
the USSR was the first to launch its satellite,
the Sputnik 1,
which was the first Earth-orbiting satellite in history.
They followed up with the Sputnik 2 the next month
and this time the satellite carried a dog named Laika
who became the first living organism to enter orbit.
It was not until the following January 31st, 1958
that the US entered the race by launching
and reaching orbit with the satellite Explorer 1.
Later that year, the US created NASA,
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
an independent agency within the federal government
that is responsible for the civil space program,
aeronautics programs and space research.
On December 18th, 1958, the US launched
the world's first communication satellite known as SCORE.
It earned international attention when it broadcasted
a prerecorded Christmas message
from US President Dwight D. Eisenhower.
It was the first instance
of a human voice being broadcast from space.
In August, 1959, the US launched Explorer VI,
the world's first weather satellite.
It took the first picture of the Earth from space.
In September, the USSR launched Luna-2,
which became the first spacecraft to reach the surface,
of the moon, but these unmanned missions
were just the beginning.
In August, 1960, the USSR's Sputnik 5
was the first spacecraft to return its contents.
Two dogs, Belka and Strelka,
and some plants, alive after being in space.
The US matches this achievement the following year,
returning Ham, a chimpanzee,
alive from space.
While the first five years
of the space race demonstrated mostly matched capability,
the USSR took a marked lead on April 12th, 1961,
when Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin traveling aboard
the Vostok 1 became the first human being to reach space.
Gagarin made a single orbit around the Earth,
which took just under two hours to complete.
This milestone sent the competition
into a new decade with increased vigor.
In September, 1962,
US president John F. Kennedy announced
that the US would land people on the moon
and return them safely to Earth
before the end of the decade.
This speech is largely remembered for his declaration,
"We choose to go to the moon."
More and more people, both members of the government
and members of private industry became involved
in the US Space Race,
reflecting the intensity of the competition
with numbers growing from 36,000 people involved in 1960
to 377,000 By 1965.
In May, 1961,
the US launched Alan Shepherd aboard
the Mercury-Redstone 3.
And while Shepherd became the first American
to visit space, he was not able to enter orbit.
The flight lasted only about 15 minutes.
In the following years,
the Soviet Union replicated its victories,
sending the first woman to space in 1963.
Valentina Terra Tereshkova orbited the Earth
for three days aboard Vostok 6
and pioneering the first spacewalk
when Cosmonaut Alexei Leonov left his spacecraft
for 12 minutes In 1965,
while the USSR took a clear lead in manned missions,
the US secured another achievement
with its satellite program.
On July 14th, 1965,
the American satellite Mariner 4 was the first
to voyage to Mars and take closeup images
of the planet's surface.
The US did not give up on manned missions despite tragedy.
In January, 1967, three American astronauts died
when a fire broke out inside their capsule
while it was still on the launchpad.
At the end of the following year,
however, the US spacecraft Apollo 8 became
the first manned craft to reach the moon,
orbit it, and then return to the Earth.
This victory showed the US it was time
to move full speed ahead on missions to the moon.
The next year, in July, 1969,
Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin became the first men
to walk on the moon.
The televised landing by Apollo 11 was broadcast
around the world, securing for the US what people saw
as victory in the space race.
The Soviet Union transferred its focus
to building a space station, which it completed in 1971.
In 1972, the US and the Soviet Union negotiated
a warming of relations, which paved the way
for cooperation in the realm of space travel.
In 1975, the first joint space mission
between the two countries occurred.
Separately, the Apollo and Soyuz spacecrafts traveled
into orbit and docked in space
where their two commanders shook hands.
This was a symbolic end to the space race.
After it occurred, the two countries engaged
in future missions together,
like the Shuttle-Mir program in 1993.
The space race had broader implications
for the world beyond just the development
of space flight technology.
The race to send humans to space resulted in the development
of other widely used technology,
including communication and weather satellites,
which are used today
for things like broadband and GPS.
The imaging technology used in CAT scans
was initially developed during the space race
for deep space photography.
NASA also made innovations in shock absorbent material,
which became useful for developing better artificial limbs
and wireless headsets were first developed for astronauts
to use in space.
(suspenseful music)
In response to the catastrophes brought on
by totalitarian ideologies in the 20th century,
a new school of thought began
in the 1970s known as postmodernism.
Postmodernism was deeply skeptical of the claim
that there was any kind of universal truth.
Instead, focusing on relative truths and morals.
The postmodernist period coincided with a cultural shift
that occurred as the baby boomers came of age.
During the 1970s, these young people continued movements
that had begun in the 1960s demonstrating
against the policies in schools of thought
of the previous age.
Thousands of students marched against the Vietnam War
and the draft, as well as against the manufacturer
of napalm, Dow Chemical.
Not all campus anti-war protests were peaceful.
Some turned violent,
including the May, 1970 incident at Kent State University
in Ohio, in which 13 students were shot by members
of the National Guard.
During this time, people also protested
against discrimination against women, racial segregation,
and other issues.
The very first Earth Day was observed on April 22nd, 1970.
Television and radio were ubiquitous with such shows
as "All in the Family," "Saturday Night Live,"
and "Wheel of Fortune" premiering.
This decade also saw the launch
of the first successful home video game system,
the Atari 2600,
and the founding of tech companies Apple and Microsoft.
At the same time, the US was in a recession
and gas prices were skyrocketing due
to the Arab oil embargo,
which was inflicted on the countries
who had supported Israel in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
The US also faced political turmoil
as illegal activities committed in the name
of reelecting President Richard Nixon came
to light in the Watergate scandal
and caused the downfall of Nixon's presidency.
The legacy of Watergate deeply damaged
the Republican Party's reputation,
so Democrat Jimmy Carter was able
to win the presidency in 1976.
Carter prioritized calming conflicts
around the world, signing a nuclear arms reduction treaty
with the Soviet Union and giving ownership
of the Panama Canal back to Panama.
Most notably, he helped broker peace in the Middle East
where conflict had been ongoing since
the 1948 Arab-Israeli War.
But Carter's support for the Shah of Iran who wanted
to modernize and westernize Iran soon became
a point of contention.
By 1979, the Shah had lost popularity and was overthrown
at which time anti-American sentiment increased
in the country.
A group overthrew the US Embassy in Iran
and 52 American diplomats
and citizens were held hostage for the next 444 days.
In the aftermath of this Iran hostage crisis,
a second energy crisis developed,
sending gasoline prices soaring again.
In the presidential election of 1980,
Ronald Reagan defeated Carter in a landslide.
In the 1980s, social issues took a back seat
and personal financial success
became many people's primary goal.
The populist conservative movement known
as the New Right had begun growing in the late '70s
into the early '80s.
Reagan advocated for deregulating business,
reducing government spending,
and giving tax cuts to both individuals and corporations.
The tax cut plan was part of a system known
as supply-side economics
or the belief that the resulting gains
for businesses would eventually trickle
down to everyone.
Altogether, these economic policies
were known as Reaganomics.
In 1982, the United States experienced
its worst economic downturn since the Great Depression.
Nine million people were unemployed
in November of that year.
Nevertheless, Reaganomics remained popular
as it made the rich richer.
Over the 1980s, the average income of families
in the wealthiest 1% increased significantly
and at a much greater rate than the income
of middle-class families, which edged up mildly
while income for the bottom 40% of families declined.
Television had entered nearly every household
and was becoming more varied with shows like "Cheers,"
"The Simpsons" and the "Cosby Show" premiering.
Also popular was TV news, which brought new levels
of attention to crimes like child abduction
via shows like "60 Minutes."
People also learned about tragedies around the world,
such as the famine in Ethiopia.
The Live Aid Benefit concert on July 13th, 1985
was watched by about 1.5 billion people
and raised millions of dollars for famine relief.
In 1986, viewers could watch
the local Cleveland, Ohio chapter of the United Way attempt
to break the world record
for most balloons released at one time,
but the event intended
as a harmless publicity stunt quickly went off the rails.
A colorful cloud of 1.5 million helium-filled balloons
was released, but blown by wind and pushed down by rain,
they caused an airport to shut down
and impeded the Coast Guard's efforts to find two fishermen
who needed help nearby.
The balloons clogged waterways
and caused traffic accidents
and came to be seen as a major environmental disaster.
The US returned to space in 1981
with the space shuttle Columbia,
the very first reusable space exploration vehicle.
The US flew numerous shuttle missions in the '80s,
though one was marked by tragedy.
Millions watched live in 1986
when the space shuttle Challenger exploded seconds
after takeoff, killing all seven aboard.
This grounded the space program for two
and a half years until the Discovery was launched in 1988.
Reagan's foreign policy was hawkish
and that he was eager to get the US involved
in situations abroad where communism threatened
to take over.
Under this Reagan doctrine, the US provided financial
and military assistance to the governments of Grenada,
El Salvador and Nicaragua.
However, in 1986,
it was revealed that the US had sold weapons
to Iran despite the country being under an arms embargo,
which was a sanction imposed in retribution for the storming
of the US embassy in 1979.
Members of the Reagan Administration sold Iran the arms
in a bid to illegally divert money from the sales
to a rebel group known as the Contras
who were fighting the socialist
Sandinista Government in Nicaragua.
It was a scandal for the administration
and investigations into the issue were impeded
because of the large number of documents
that were shredded or without.
Several administration officials were convicted
of crimes related to the Iran-Contra scandal,
but all were vacated or pardoned.
Another Reagan Administration scandal emerged later
after review of its response to the 1980s AIDS crisis.
Though health officials in the US had become aware
of the AIDS virus in 1981,
US leaders remained silent over the early days
of the epidemic.
Not until 1985 when AIDS had already affected more
than 7,700 people
and killed 3,500 did the government allocate funding
for AIDS research.
And it was not until 1987
that the federal government began raising AIDS awareness,
but by then, about 47,000 Americans already were infected
with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS.
The issue had largely been dismissed
because it was believed
to only be affecting sexually active gay men,
but during the 1980s, AIDS emerged as a leading cause
of death among all young adults.
By 1990, more than 100,000 people
in the US had died from AIDS.
Getting much more federal attention was an epidemic
of a different kind, drugs.
Smokeable, solid chunks of crack cocaine were cheap
and highly available in major US cities in 1985.
Crack particularly affected low-income communities living
in cities which included large numbers of African Americans.
Drug dealers contributed to a significant increase
in violence in these communities.
Between 1984 and 1989, the homicide rate
for young Black men more than doubled
and Black communities also saw increases
in fetal death rates, low-birth-weight babies,
weapons arrests, and the number of children in foster care.
In 1986, the US Congress passed laws that made penalties
for the possession or trafficking
of crack cocaine 100 times more severe than
for powdered cocaine, which was widely believed
to be targeting low-income African Americans
who were more likely to be using cheap crack rather
than the more expensive powder
or other drugs like crystal methamphetamine.
This resulted in harsh social consequences,
including increased police brutality
against African Americans and large numbers
of young Black men imprisoned on drug convictions
for long sentences, which then caused them to lose access
to voting, housing, and employment opportunities,
which in turn led
to increased violent crime in poor Black communities.
Though President Nixon began the so-called War on Drugs
in the 1970s, the federal effort to stop drug use
and to prosecute users was widely expanded
under President Reagan.
Whereas Nixon's programs had repealed minimum sentences
for marijuana possession
and set up federal drug treatment programs,
Reagan's approach was to increase criminalization.
In 1984, Reagan signed the Comprehensive Crime Control Act,
which expanded the federal penalties for possession,
cultivation, or transfer of marijuana,
established minimum sentences
and abolished parole for federal prisoners.
From 1980 to 1984, the Federal Annual Budget
of the FBI's Drug Enforcement Units went from $8 million
to 95 million.
When George H.W. Bush took over the presidency in 1989,
he continued Reagan's efforts.
In his very first televised address as president,
Bush held up a plastic baggie filled
with white chalky chunks,
identifying it as crack cocaine.
"It's as innocent-looking as candy,
but it's turning our cities into battle zones," he said.
Drug use was actually in decline by 1989,
but Bush went on to spend $45 billion mostly
on drug-related law enforcement which was more than
the previous four administrations combined.
Later, it was revealed that the baggie from Bush's speech,
supposedly confiscated from a drug bust just days prior
just steps from the White House
in Lafayette Park had been a setup.
An undercover federal agent had lured a teenager drug dealer
to the park before busting him
to make it seem like the drug trade was
on the president's doorstep.
Another major event of Bush's presidency was the Gulf War.
Under the rule of Saddam Hussein,
Iraq wanted to nationalize Kuwait
and take control of its oil fields,
thereby controlling a significant amount
of the world's oil supply.
Because the US
and other countries wanted to maintain access
to these fields, they formed a coalition
to stop the invasion.
Starting January 16th, 1991,
an air and ground war was fought with soldiers
from the US, the UK,
France, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Kuwait.
The Iraqi army was defeated handily retreating from Kuwait
just a month later on February 28th.
The conflict's impacts were felt into the 21st century.
(mellow music)
Between 1990 and 1997,
the percentage of households
in the United States owning computers increased
from 15% to 35%.
This widespread adoption of personal computers
and the World Wide Web catapulted
the information technology industry
into the stratosphere and investors
and entrepreneurs everywhere were looking for ways
to get a piece of the pie.
By 1998, lured by the potential profitability
of online businesses, low interest rates,
and the availability of venture capital,
investors were eager to back nearly any company
with a .com in its name,
while ignoring traditional predictors of success.
That is the ability to turn a profit
or even a business plan of any kind.
At the height of the boom,
even companies that had never made any revenue were able
to go public by issuing an initial public offering
or IPO, and raise money.
On paper, some people became billionaires
practically overnight.
The NASDAQ Composite Index,
one of the most watched stock market metrics,
rose by 582% from January, 1995
to March, 2000.
The situation was risky, however,
because these companies were highly overvalued due
to their lack of a plan to turn a profit.
Analysts were instead focused on their ability
to attract internet traffic.
Speculation or the purchase of risky stocks at a low price
with the expectation that the price will rise enough
to make a later profit,
the dotcom speculation bubble was just a house of cards.
When investment capital began to dry up,
many of the companies that had caused
so much excitement went bankrupt,
and the bubble burst.
Market panic resulted in massive sell-offs, and by 2002,
investor losses from the dotcom boom were estimated
at around $5 trillion.
The dotcom bubbles bursting is credited with helping
to trigger an eight-month economic recession starting
in March, 2001.
However, the recession is considered one
of the milder ones in the country's history,
and not all of the companies
of the dotcom era succumbed to bankruptcy.
Some of those that survived became the juggernauts
we're familiar with today, such as Microsoft, Amazon, eBay,
Qualcomm, and Cisco.
(suspenseful music)
After a record-breaking turnout,
Barack Obama was the first ever African American to be voted
to the office of US president,
winning the popular vote
by more than 10 million votes,
and securing a vast majority of electoral votes.
Obama's message was hope
and it resonated with the American people.
As the war of terror raged on,
economic difficulties on the home front compounded
the feelings of insecurity.
In 2008, losses on a rapidly declining housing market
within the US caused a chain reaction
of losses across the global financial market,
causing a massive
and sustained economic contraction known
as the Great Recession.
The recession marked
the most significant economic downturn in the US
since the Great Depression of 1929.
Thousands of Americans could not make
their loan payments and lost their homes,
businesses went bankrupt
and the US government scrambled
to help alleviate the damage.
In 2009, under the direction
of newly elected President Barack Obama,
the Congress passed a series of acts
to alleviate the issues caused by the recession
and to install reforms
to ensure it could never happen again.
In 2013, the Afghan Military officially took over control
of operations in their country,
and the US announced a timetable
for a complete US withdrawal by 2016.
During the election of 2016,
Republican Nominee Donald Trump
and Democrat Hillary Clinton faced off in one
of the ugliest elections the country had ever experienced.
While Clinton ran on her vast experience
within the federal government,
Trump's campaign was unlike any that had been run before.
Trump appealed to a group of Americans
who had never felt they'd been marginalized in recent years
and to people who had distrust in the government.
Clinton was defeated by Trump who secured the majority
of electoral votes.
Almost immediately, suspicion of Russian
and Chinese involvement in tampering
with the election arised.
In 2017, President Donald Trump took office
and reversed the planned withdrawal
as an emerging terrorist organization known
as the Islamic State began operating within Afghanistan.
Trump authorized the use
of the US's largest non-nuclear bomb
in an act which coincided with his decision
to continue the US's military presence on the ground.
After another two years of conflict,
the US and Taliban once again opened peace negotiations
and after a series of back and forth cancellations,
an agreement was at last reached in 2020.
In early 2020, a new type of virus emerged from Wuhan China.
By mid-March 2020,
all 50 US states had reported at least one positive case
of COVID-19 and nearly all of the new infections were caused
by community spread,
and not by contracting the disease abroad.
The COVID-19 pandemic took a heavy toll
on Americans economically, politically, and psychologically,
and revealed deep divisions between Americans' views
of the role of government in a crisis,
particularly with regard to vaccine mandates.
In 2020, the nation again faced
a challenging and incendiary election.
Incumbent Donald Trump running
for reelection faced off
against Former Vice President Joe Biden
at the height of the pandemic.
Again, domestic issues of racial injustice, gun control,
and appointments to the Supreme Court
were the chief concerns of the race.
As the ongoing health crisis further divided the parties,
the psychological and physical toll
of the pandemic became a centerpiece for both candidates.
After a contentious election
during which the counting lasted longer than normal,
due to early election, and mail-in ballots prompted
by the COVID-19 pandemic,
Biden won the presidency, winning the majority
of electoral votes as well as the popular vote.
The outcome of the election was immediately contested
by Trump and the Republicans who made claims of fraud.
Trump would claim repeatedly that the election was stolen
and increased distrust in the American electoral process.
On January 6th, 2021,
as the US Congress met to certify the election,
large crowds of Trump supporters led
by the Proud Boys and Oath Keepers,
both far-right anti-government extremist organizations
with ties to white supremacist organizations,
the groups conspired to take the US Capitol Building
and force the Congress to certify the election as fraudulent
and instate Trump as the rightful president.
On January 6th, the mob outside
of the Capitol Building breached through security
and entered the Capitol, forcing the Congress to flee
and Capitol police to engage with force in some cases.
When the police had at last cleared the building,
counting of the electoral votes resumed
and Vice President Pence proclaimed Biden the winner.
In 2021, Joe Biden assumed the office
of the presidency alongside Vice President Kamala Harris,
the first African American,
and first woman to hold the office.
Under President Joe Biden,
the US military at last began
its final withdrawal from Afghanistan.
As it did, the Taliban quickly rushed to fill the gap
and toppled the fragile Afghan government,
undoing the work that was done for the last 20 years.
The following year, 2022,
the Russian Federation invaded the Republic of Ukraine
and the United States began funneling aid to the country
to combat Russia's expansion into the region.
Today, Biden's Administration continues to push
for progressive policies, both at home and abroad,
and still combats the intense political division
within the country.
(mellow music)
As the 2024 election looms,
the future of the United States seems
to hang in the balance.
Since the signing
of the Declaration of Independence in 1776,
the nation has endured substantial
and often violent changes politically, socially,
and economically, but this is,
in and of itself, the defining attribute
of the United States that,
despite the trials and tribulations,
she always emerges intact and stronger than before.
The beauty of the United States
and its people is their resilience
and its ability to adapt and change.
Today, the United States remains a world leader
to be respected and admired.
Its population of more than 334 million people is one
of the most diverse countries in the world.
Its landscape is painted with some
of the most magnificent natural features on the planet
with hundreds of recognized national
and historical parks, preserves, monuments,
and sites preserved by the federal government.
From the humblest beginnings,
the people of the United States of America have fought for
what they believed was right and continue
to do so to this day.
The indomitable American spirit,
which characterizes the best of Americans,
has helped bring the country to new heights in the realm
of politics, science, business, and culture.
And while they're far from perfect,
the American people continue to strive for greatness,
never ceasing to prove themselves worthy
of the great experiment started
by their revolution nearly 250 years ago.